Effect of different doses of supervised exercise on food intake, metabolism, and non-exercise physical activity: The E-MECHANIC randomized controlled trial.

Discussion
In this large randomized controlled trial with 2 doses of exercise, energy intake assessed with DLW increased significantly and as hypothesized in the 20 KKW group, as well as in the 8 KKW group, which was unexpected. The hypotheses were based on previous research demonstrating that compensation most frequently occurs at higher doses of exercise (4), although the results of this study indicate that compensation also occurs at lower doses of exercise. This discrepancy may be due to differences in the study samples since the current study recruited men and women aged 18–65 y, whereas the Church et al. (4) study recruited postmenopausal women. Change in energy intake measured with the less sensitive test meals did not differ among the groups, which also was unexpected. Significant weight compensation was detected in the 8 and 20 KKW groups. Compensation in the 8 KKW group was not predicted, although it was predicted that compensation would be significantly higher in the 20 KKW group compared with the 8 KKW group, as observed.
Although most participants in the 8 KKW (76.3%) and 20 KKW (90.2%) groups compensated, there was great heterogeneity in weight loss and compensation with both exercise doses. Large individual variability in weight loss in response to exercise has been observed in other studies, including a 12-wk single-dose exercise study with 35 participants (7). Almost half (42.4%) and 23.5% of participants in the 8 and 20 KKW groups, respectively, did not lose any weight or gained weight. These percentages are much higher than the 13% of participants who did the same in the 12-wk exercise study by King et al. (7), thus suggesting that longer durations of exercise increase compensatory responses. This conclusion is further supported by Church et al. (4), who found that compensation, assessed on a weekly basis, did not occur until approximately week 12. Very few participants in the exercise groups lost more weight than expected. Participants in the 8 and 20 KKW groups lost only 36.2% and 40.8% of predicted weight loss, respectively, which is similar to previous studies (34), including ours, although previously we had not always found compensation at lower exercise doses (4, 5). Body fat loss was greater in the 20 KKW group compared to control, and change in lean mass did not differ among groups. Compensation appears to be a response to long-term exercise training because short-term studies (e.g., 13 wk) show smaller compensation only at higher doses (35) and acute studies (e.g., 2 d) show no compensation (36). Weight change in the control group was minimal (?0.2 kg), and participants in all groups were not instructed to change their diet.
To our knowledge, this is one of the first studies to prospectively attempt to identify the mechanisms of compensation by assessing changes in energy intake, metabolism, and self-report measures of appetite and other constructs. The study found that compensation appears to be primarily the result of increased energy intake and not changes in metabolism/energy expenditure, RQ, or non-exercise physical activity. Energy intake by DLW increased by 90.7 and 123.6 kcal/d (3.9% and 5.5%) in the 8 and 20 KKW groups, respectively. Increases of this magnitude are difficult to detect over the short term, and energy intake is known to vary widely from day to day (37, 38), indicating that long-term measures of energy intake are optimal. This may have contributed to the failure to detect increased energy intake with test meals and is consistent with the results of King et al. (7), who found that energy intake measured with test meals did not increase among the entire sample of exercisers (energy intake and hunger did increase among compensators in their study, however). Another interpretation is that increased energy intake likely occurs outside of meals (e.g., from snacking or drinking calorie-containing beverages between meals). Finally, it can be difficult for people to detect changes in daily energy intake of this size (?100 kcal), which could contribute to unawareness of compensation and hence the inability to address it.
Changes in RQ, RMR, and non-exercise physical activity were similar by group, the latter of which is consistent with results from other studies (39, 40). A review concluded that exercise does not result in decreased non-exercise activity or energy expenditure (41). At the exercise doses achieved in this study, people do not appear to become more sedentary outside of structured exercise after they begin to exercise, although it is possible that activities of daily living limit the ability to detect such an effect.
More participants in the exercise groups classified as compensators met the criteria for metabolic syndrome compared with noncompensators (31% compared with 11%, respectively), suggesting that the compensatory increase in energy intake might be related to the predisposition to diabetes and insulin insensitivity. Also, compensators had a smaller response to exercise in terms of improved cardiorespiratory fitness compared with noncompensators, but they had larger reductions in glucose levels, although the difference was small (2.5 mg/dL). Compensators had an increase in adjusted RMR, indicating that their bodies were expending more energy relative to body mass after exercise training, which could be a physiological response to increased energy intake, or they had longer lasting excess post-exercise oxygen consumption (42). Increased RMR, adjusted using the methods described by Galgani and Santos (17), was also observed in the compensators compared with the noncompensators. Nonetheless, the Galgani values were also higher at baseline in the compensators than in the noncompensators (Supplemental Table 5), whereas baseline RMR did not differ by compensator status when adjusted only for fat-free mass (data not shown). Thus, compensators could have higher relative RMR regardless of exercise levels, and adjustments to RMR beyond fat-free mass are needed to detect such differences.
Supporting the conclusion that compensation is due to increased energy intake, compensators had an ?90 kcal/d larger increase in energy intake and increased cravings for sweets, hunger, prospective food consumption, and compensatory health beliefs (and a smaller reduction in disinhibition). The results suggest that compensators might 1) differ in important ways prior to exercise that contribute to a differential response, 2) not experience some physiological (e.g., increased cardiorespiratory fitness) benefits of exercise that lead to exercise being more difficult/aversive, 3) have different psychological responses to exercise (e.g., increased compensatory beliefs and smaller reductions in disinhibition) that affect other health behaviors, and 4) experience an increased drive to eat. Furthermore, the results indicate that compensators, who one could argue are most in need of exercise based on the higher prevalence of the metabolic syndrome, are most likely to fail to fully realize the benefits of exercise and possibly discontinue exercise due to the perceived lack of benefit or aversive aspects of exercise.
The results suggest that clinicians should include a concomitant lifestyle, dietary, or possibly pharmacological intervention when prescribing exercise if weight loss is the goal. Further research is needed to determine what interventions are most effective at reducing compensation and improving the beneficial response to exercise, and many of the constructs that were different between compensators and noncompensators (e.g., change in disinhibition and cravings) can be targeted by various interventions.
Study strengths include being the first prospective randomized controlled trial powered to identify the mechanisms by which exercise fails to produce the expected level of weight loss. Also, energy intake, energy expenditure, and activity were measured with gold standard techniques, and questionnaires assessed constructs associated with health behaviors and health-related quality of life. Finally, exercise adherence was excellent, and the dose of exercise achieved was carefully quantified. Weaknesses include lack of data regarding what foods participants ate and when, as well as the fact that the majority of the sample was composed of women, although the randomization procedures considered sex.
In conclusion, in this 6-mo randomized controlled exercise trial, participants in the exercise groups compensated and lost less weight than expected. Compensation was found to primarily be the result of increased energy intake and not changes in metabolism/energy expenditure or non-exercise physical activity. Participants who compensated were more likely to meet criteria for metabolic syndrome, responded differently to exercise, and reported increased appetite and compensatory health beliefs. These findings provide insight into how to reduce compensation during long-term exercise.

