Differential effects of attentional focus strategies during long-term resistance training

DISCUSSION 
This is the first study to investigate the effects of different attentional focus strategies on long-term muscular adaptations. The study produced several novel and notable findings. First, an internal focus elicited superior hypertrophic increases in the elbow flexors compared to an external focus, but MT in the quadriceps was unaffected by attentional focus strategy. The differences in changes in elbow flexor size between INTERNAL and EXTERNAL (12.4% vs. 6.9%, respectively) translated into a large magnitude of effect favouring the INTERNAL condition (h2 p = 0.307). These findings partially support the common bodybuilding claim that a mind–muscle connection enhances muscle growth. Although we did not attempt to determine mechanistic reasons for discrepant findings between the upper and lower limbs, it can be speculated that subjects found it easier to focus on the elbow flexor muscles compared to the thighs – a sentiment that was anecdotally expressed by several participants in the INTERNAL group. Postulations regarding the mechanisms of this phenomenon can be deduced from motor control and neuroplasticity perspectives. First, neuromuscular reeducation, at least following tendon transfer, appears to be more prevalent in upper compared to lower extremities (Sperry, 1945), suggesting that the nervous system is better able to alter muscle recruitment patterns of the upper extremity. Second, individuals have greater force control of their elbow flexors than their knee extensors (Tracy, Mehoudar, & Ortega, 2007). Indeed, this may relate to why individuals have better control of and coordination with their upper extremities when compared to their lower extremities (Kauranen & Vanharanta, 1996). Practically speaking, Gordon and Ferris (Gordon & Ferris, 2004) speculated, If there are inherent differences in efferent control between any muscle groups, it would seem likely that lower limb muscles might be the least accurate. Humans rarely perform fine motor tasks with their lower limbs, instead relying on them for gross power output during locomotion. Such sentiments do not preclude one from being able to learn how to effectively utilize an internal focus of attention. That is, such a phenomenon may be related to the subjects’ untrained statuses, as individuals with RT experience have been shown to be able to increase quadriceps EMG amplitude when directed to focus on the thigh musculature during knee extension exercise (Marchant & Greig, 2017), and recent evidence suggests that training statusdependent control may indeed be muscle-specific (Calatayud et al., 2016). If true, this would suggest that trained individuals may be able to enhance quadriceps hypertrophy by adopting an internal focus during lower body RT. Perhaps differences in this regard would have been borne out with a longer intervention period. Further investigation is needed to test the validity of this hypothesis.

Attentional focus had markedly different effects specific to the upper versus lower limbs. With respect to peak isometric elbow flexion strength, INTERNAL resulted in a 16.2% increase versus a 2.6% in EXTERNAL, translating into an ES of a moderate magnitude of effect (h2 p = 0.114). These potential findings are in contrast to acute studies, wherein an external focus of attention is often found to result in greater strength performance than an internal focus of attention (Marchant et al., 2009); therefore, it is important to note that participants were not encouraged to utilize specific attentional foci during strength testing. Although potential mechanisms for these non-statistical differences in isometric elbow flexion strength were not studied, two often-proposed mechanisms of strength gain include peripheral (i.e. muscle hypertrophy and normalized muscle force) and neural (i.e. neural drive and excitation) changes (Erskine, Jones, Williams, Stewart, & Degens, 2010). To explore muscle size as a potential contributor, an additional ANCOVA was carried out post hoc, using the change in elbow flexor thickness as a covariate. After accounting for the change in elbow flexor thickness, the magnitude of the group effect decreased substantially, from moderate (h2 p = 0.114) to trivial (h2 p = 0.006). In contrast to recent criticisms of the theory that hypertrophy is related to changes in strength (Buckner et al., 2016), it appears that, in this study, differences in hypertrophy accounted for potential differences in strength between groups. As opposed to isometric elbow flexion strength, peak isometric knee extension strength favoured EXTERNAL versus INTERNAL (20.4% vs. 10.1%, respectively), with the ES indicating a small magnitude of effect (h2 p = 0.064). Although the observed effect size was small and did not reach the a priori alpha, in the interest of consistency, another post hoc ANCOVA was carried out, utilizing both changes in vastus lateralis and rectus femoris thickness as covariates, but unlike elbow flexion strength, the change in magnitude of the effect size was minuscule (h2 p = 0.052). The study had several notable limitations. First, the exercise protocol employed a moderate repetition range and thus the results cannot necessarily be extrapolated to training with heavier or lighter loads, especially because the acute effects of internal cueing are load-dependent (Calatayud et al., 2016). Second, although we provided explicit instructions on the focus of attention and supplemented the instructions with cueing throughout each set, there is no way to be sure that subjects were actually focusing as directed. It remains possible that some subjects did not adhere to the proper focus in at least some of the sets, which in turn may have altered results. That said, the marked between-group differences in elbow flexor muscle growth favouring the internal focus condition provides strong evidence that cueing strategies affect hypertrophic outcomes. Third, MT was measured only at the mid-portion of the muscles. Although this region is widely considered to be indicative of overall muscle growth, some studies report that hypertrophy manifests in a regionalspecific manner, with greater adaptations seen proximally and/or distally (Wakahara et al., 2012; Wakahara, Fukutani, Kawakami, & Yanai, 2013). Thus, we cannot discount the prospect that greater proximal or distal increases in MT occurred in one protocol versus the other. Fourth, we were not able to obtain accurate reporting on dietary practices throughout the study and thus cannot rule out the possibility that differences in nutritional intake unduly confounded results. Finally, the findings are specific to untrained subjects; future research is needed to determine the strength- and hypertrophyrelated effects of different attentional focus strategies on those with previous RT experience. 

CONCLUSION 
Our findings indicate that an internal focus of attention is superior to an external focus of attention when the goal is to maximize hypertrophy of the elbow flexors. Attentional focus does not seem to affect lower extremity hypertrophy, which may be due to the difficulty for untrained individuals to establish a “mind-muscle connection” in the thigh musculature during resistive exercise. 

Page 1 of 1

