Higher muscle fiber conduction velocity and early rate of torque development in chronically strength-trained individuals

DISCUSSION
MFCV was measured during explosive force contractions in a group of resistance-trained individuals and a control cohort. ST exhibited greater explosive torque, early RTD, and greater MFCV with respect to controls throughout the contraction. When explosive torque was normalized to maximal torque, ST had a higher RTD at the beginning of the contraction (0–50 ms). Moreover, a greater absolute and normalized conduction velocity (MFCVMAX) during the EMD and in the first 50 ms of torque generation was observed for the ST group. This result indicates a recruitment of motor units with greater conduction velocities. This is the first study showing that ST may recruit larger motor units in a shorter amount of time.

Muscle Fiber Conduction Velocity
The average MFCV values are in agreement with previous reports of MFCV during steady-state contractions. For example, Farina et al. reported estimates of MFCV in the BB during isometric steady-state contractions at 50% MVC of ~4.6 m/s (30). Zwarts and Arendt-Nielsen estimated MFCV at high contraction forces of the BB and reported values ranging between 3.22 and 5.11 m/s (57). MFCV average values in the present study were also in agreement with estimates of single-motor unit conduction velocities using intramuscular EMG recordings during voluntary and electrical activation of the BB muscle. Moreover, the present estimates are also in accordance with other studies involving different muscular contractions and protocols (25, 26, 32, 41, 42, 47, 48).

Interestingly, only two studies assessed MFCV in power athletes and only during electrical stimulation and maximal voluntary contractions (43, 49). Sadoyama et al. reported a significantly higher maximal MFCV in a group of trained sprinters compared with endurance runners (4.84 vs. 4.31 m/s; 49). Moreover, they reported a significant relation between the relative area of fast-twitch fibers and conduction velocity (49).

Recently, Methenitis et al. estimated MFCV during electrical stimulation of muscle fibers in endurance runners and power-trained and ST individuals and separately measured RTD (43). They reported significant relations between MFCV, muscle fiber cross-sectional area, and rate of force development (43). However, estimates of MFCV were assessed during electrical stimulation and thus separately from the voluntary generation of explosive force. Therefore, it was not possible to associate the underlying neural strategies of muscle control with explosive force performance. Collectively, these previous results indicate that MFCV may be an indicator of muscle explosive performance, although no previous study assessed MFCV during explosive torque generation.

Explosive Torque and RTD
The RTD was significantly greater for ST during the early phase of explosive torque generation (Fig. 3A). However, when the moment-time curve was normalized to the maximal strength, the RTD for the resistance-trained subjects was significantly different only in the first 50 ms of the contraction (Fig. 3B). Because the relative explosive torque at 150 and 200 ms from contraction onset was similar between the two groups, the controls developed higher RTD during the second and third time windows from force onset (Fig. 3B).

Previous studies found an increase in the EMG amplitude and rate of force development in the initial phase of contraction after 4 wk of explosive training (7). In addition, a greater normalized rate of force development in the first 50 ms of contraction was found for power athletes during knee extensor explosive torque (51). Because the first 50 ms of contraction strongly reflect neural activation (13, 15, 16, 54), strength or power training presumably increases RTD by a faster recruitment of motor units, as discussed below.

MFCV During the Explosive Phase of Contraction
ST individuals have the ability to develop higher levels of force in the first 50 ms of contraction. This seems to be associated with greater MFCV in the same time interval, which indicates recruitment of motor units with greater conduction velocity. The role of motor unit recruitment during explosive force contraction is not well understood because it is not possible to identify representative populations of motor units in very short time intervals.

The primary determinant of motor unit twitch force is the number of muscle fibers innervated by the axon (17, 53). Motor unit peak twitch forces in humans range from ~6 to ~78 mN·m with maximal tetanic forces ranging from ~30 to ~200 mN·m (36, 38). Therefore, one of the mechanisms that determined the increase in RTD during the first 0–50-ms interval in the ST may have been the recruitment of larger motor units with greater and faster twitches. There is evidence showing correlations between electrically evoked twitch torque and early voluntary rate of force development, which could be associated with the differences in muscle fiber composition and/or Ca2+ saturation for the trained individuals (3, 34).

Interestingly, the two groups showed similar EMD values, which is in accordance with a previous study that compared the EMD in power-trained and untrained cohorts (51). This finding is, however, contradictory with a higher MFCV during the EMD. A higher absolute MFCV value should theoretically anticipate the release of Ca2+ and thus the rise in force. However, these problems may be related to the techniques employed in assessing the delay between the neural and muscular apparatus. The EMD during explosive contractions may not be sensitive to differences in neural activation due to a compressed recruitment (12, 15). We have recently shown that when the EMD is assessed as the time difference between the neural drive and force during the sustained contractions, the central nervous system modulates the delay broadly and according to the rate of force development (12). Indeed, the neuromechanical delay seems to be predominantly influenced by the type of recruited motor units and the intrinsic properties of the motor neuron (5, 12). Future studies assessing the neuromechanical delay in strength/power-trained individuals may be warranted.

MFCV increases with voluntary force production due to the relation between motor unit recruitment thresholds and fiber diameter (4, 8, 11, 35). This association implies that the ordered recruitment of motor units may be assessed by estimates of conduction velocity (10). We have recently reported that large, high-threshold motor units innervate fibers with large diameter (11), which explains the association between motor unit mechanical properties and conduction velocity previously reported (4). Moreover, we have recently demonstrated that the increase in average MFCV during voluntary force contractions is associated with the progressive recruitment of motor units with increasing conduction velocity and predicts recruitment thresholds at the individual subject level (10).

In the present study, MFCV was the average of the conduction velocities of the active motor units during explosive force contractions, in time intervals of 50 ms following EMG onset. We showed that there may be significant differences in the recruited motor units during explosive tasks in ST compared with moderately active individuals. Absolute MFCV values were greater in ST throughout the full duration of the explosive contractions (Fig. 3A). Moreover, the early absolute and normalized MFCV were positively associated with RTD (Fig. 4). Because absolute MFCV values are linearly related to the diameters of muscle fibers, higher absolute conduction velocity values may indicate that ST have muscle fibers with larger diameters due to the strength training-induced hypertrophy (43) compared with controls (24, 43).

However, when MFCV values were normalized to the maximal value during MVF (full motor unit recruitment), ST had a significantly greater MFCV-rel during the initial phase of the explosive contractions. Specifically, MFCV-relEMD and MFCV-rel0–50 were on average ~9% greater (Fig. 4B). This suggests that during the early phase of explosive force, ST have the ability to recruit motor units with faster conduction velocities in a shorter time. It takes ~100 ms more for the controls to reach similar values of normalized MFCV compared with the ST group. Interestingly, the changes in conduction velocity did not differ between groups (Fig. 4, A and B), and the MFCV plateaued in the interval 50–100 ms, which can be interpreted as full motor unit recruitment (10). This interpretation is in agreement with previous studies reporting that most motor units are recruited at one-third of maximal force during explosive contractions (15, 16). Moreover, MFCV increased in all subjects from the EMD to 0–50 ms, indicating that the ordered recruitment according to the size of the motor unit was preserved during the explosive tasks in both groups.

The underlying mechanism that may determine an increase in explosive force for the ST individuals may be an anticipated recruitment of high-threshold motor units with high conduction velocities. The difference between MFCV of high- and low-threshold motor units within a muscle is ~2 m/s (11). A faster motor unit recruitment (and conduction velocity) would achieve greater peak mechanical torques in a shorter time. The release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum is correlated to the speed of the action potential on the fiber membrane (21). Indeed, MFCV is related to motor unit time-to-peak twitch forces (4). The increase in MFCV may potentially allow a faster calcium uptake and thus anticipating the rise in force.

Van Cutsem et al. reported an increase in motor unit discharge rates following ballistic training (55) and concluded, in agreement with other studies, that RTD depends on motor unit discharge rate (16, 18, 55). On the other hand, the recruitment threshold of motor units significantly influences the discharge rate at a given absolute force (18). Anticipating the recruitment of high-threshold motor units would result in reaching motor unit peak discharge rate and motor unit peak RTD in a shorter time. Accordingly, in the present study, MFCV was positively associated with RTD (Fig. 4A), suggesting that motor unit recruitment may play an important role in explosive force production.

Interestingly, the correlation between RTD0–50 and early MFCV values (MFCVEMD,0–50) was different for the ST and untrained individuals. MFCV0–50 was not correlated with RTD0–50 in the ST group (Fig. 4). This result indicates that ST completed the motor unit recruitment during the very early phase of explosive force, i.e., between the EMD and the first 50 ms from contraction onset (Fig. 4B). The increase in MFCV during the explosive force at the 50- and 100-ms time points for the ST is presumably due to some subjects continuing the recruitment while the subjects with higher RTD achieved a faster plateau in MFCV (Fig. 4). Indeed, it took more time for the untrained individuals to reach high MFCV (and full motor unit recruitment) values (Figs. 3 and 4).

It must be noted that the number of subjects in the present study may be too low for a correlation study. Moreover, the cross-sectional design cannot isolate the innate and environmental factors that contributed to the explosive force and MFCV differences found between the cohorts. However, in the present study the trained individuals performed combined strength and explosive training for >3 yr. Recent evidence showed a significant increase in explosive force production after 12 wk of isometric explosive training compared with isometric sustained-contraction strength training (6). The large differences in the early RTD for the trained subjects in the present study may also indicate that the neural contributors to explosive strength could be related to chronic exposure to explosive/strength training and that the neural adaptations may continue over time. Future studies assessing the neural contributors to explosive force in large cohorts and longitudinal (>1 yr) interventions are warranted.

Conclusion
Resistance-trained individuals showed higher RTD and explosive force in the very early phase of contraction that was accompanied by an increase in absolute and normalized MFCV compared with controls. These observations may be explained by recruitment of fast-twitch motor units (i.e., large motor units with large muscle fiber diameters) in a shorter amount of time in the resistance-trained cohort than in controls. In addition to the functional implications in the study of human explosive force, the study also presents a methodology that may be applied in the assessment of the neural strategies of muscle control in health, training, and pathology.
Page 1 of 1

