Sleep and Obesity article Sleep disturbance and obesity risk section Poor sleep quality and excessive daytime sleepiness in the absence of obstructive sleep apnea

Severe obesity appears to be associated with marked sleep disturbances, even in individuals who do not have OSA [72–75]. Such sleep disturbances may equally predispose severely obese individuals to accumulate a sleep debt and may contribute to the dysregulation of appetite, limit the drive for physical activity, and further compromise weight maintenance.
Cross-sectional studies examining self-reported sleep quality have generally found that worse sleep quality is associated with higher BMI [76–78], but the longitudinal studies have been scarce and the results inconsistent [79,80]. A more recent cross-sectional analysis in 400 women participants in the Sleep and Health in Women Study showed that not only sleep duration but also sleep quality, as determined by sleep efficiency and sleep architecture (specifically minutes of SWS, the ‘deep restorative sleep’) were inversely related to waist circumference, after adjusting for age, level of physical activity, smoking status, alcohol consumption and AHI [20•]. Such associations were stronger in young women (age <50 years), suggesting that in older age the relationship between sleep quality and obesity may be less robust. The relationship between less time spent in SWS and central obesity could be mediated by a decrease in growth hormone level, which is secreted during SWS. Growth hormone deficiency is associated with visceral obesity, which can be reversed by growth hormone replacement [81,82]. Furthermore, a reduced amount of SWS leads to elevated cortisol levels, which favor central obesity [83].
In the Cardiovascular Health Epidemiology Study, which focused exclusively on African–Americans, an impressive 50% or more of the participants surveyed reported suboptimal sleep duration and low-sleep quality as assessed by the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality scale [46]. In a multivariate analysis model, the effect of sleep duration on obesity risk was rather modest, with a significant association between lower sleep quality and increased BMI in women only, and this association was modulated by perceived stress level as measured by the Cohen scale.
A sex difference in the association between poor-sleep quality and obesity risk has been confirmed in a longitudinal study of 7000 Finnish adults, aged 40–60 years. In women, sleep problems (difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep) predicted weight gain after 5–7 years. Moreover, there was a graded effect depending on the frequency of the sleep disturbances [47•].
Nordin and Kaplan [48] examined the effect of sleep discontinuity on the development of obesity over a 30-year period in approximately 7000 middle-age adults. Sleep quality was self-reported and assessed by the question ‘how often do you have any trouble getting to sleep or staying asleep’? On the basis of the answers compared from the first and last observation, the participants were divided into four categories of sleep continuity, consistently good continuity, consistent discontinuity, impaired continuity (worsened over time), and improved continuity. The main outcome was the risk of transition to and from obesity. Consistent sleep discontinuity was associated with 70% risk of conversion to obesity after adjusting for confounding variables related to demographics, pain, lifestyle, and health including sleep duration. Both consistent sleep discontinuity and impaired sleep continuity reduced the chance for transitioning from obesity, thus increasing the risk of staying obese. The major limitation of the study was that sleep quality and anthropometrics were self-reported and the analysis could not control the presence of a sleep disorder like OSA, which could in part account for the risk of weight gain.