Sleep and Obesity article Sleep disturbance and obesity risk section Obstructive sleep apnea

Sleep loss occurs not only as a result of habitual behavior, but also in presence of pathological conditions associated with disturbed sleep, like obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). The increase in both the prevalence and the severity of obesity has translated into an increase in the prevalence of obesity-related comorbidities including OSA. The prevalence of OSA in the US adult population has been estimated to be 24% in men and 9% in women [49] but is increased in severe obesity by up to 93.6% among men and 73.5% among women [50].
OSA is characterized by recurrent episodes of complete or partial obstruction of the upper airway during sleep associated with progressive respiratory effort to overcome the obstruction. These events lead to cortical micro-arousals and oxygen desaturation and overall sleep fragmentation, chronic sleep loss, and increased sympathetic nervous activity [51]. Whether the sleep fragmentation secondary to OSA results in similar pathophysiological mechanisms like sleep deprivation [52] has not been well studied.
Although compelling evidence shows that obesity predisposes to OSA and that losing weight results in OSA improvement, recent studies suggest that OSA itself may cause weight gain. If sleep deprivation appears to be a risk factor for obesity, the sleep fragmentation, overall sleep loss, and daytime sleepiness associated with OSA could similarly favor weight gain, which then further worsens OSA. According to this new paradigm, OSA would cause a complex interaction of behavioral changes, leptin resistance, and increased ghrelin levels leading to decreased physical activity and/or an increase in unhealthier eating habits. A few studies have previously suggested that increased severity of OSA [53,54] and excessive daytime sleepiness [55] are associated with decreased physical activity by self-report. A recent cross-sectional study in a small sample of clinic patients [56] found that increased OSA severity was associated with objectively measured decreased physical activity, after controlling for age, sex, and daytime sleepiness. The small sample size and the study design are obvious limitations and, therefore, this study does not unequivocally prove that OSA leads to decreased physical activity but suggests a mechanism worth exploring.
Alternatively, OSA could directly affect appetite regulation and ultimately result in increased caloric intake. Studies in patients with OSA and similarly obese controls showed that those with OSA had gained weight in the year preceding the diagnosis [57] and had higher leptin levels than expected based on their percentage body fat [57–60] suggesting that OSA is associated with greater resistance to the weight-reducing effect of leptin than obesity alone. Multiple intervention studies in adults demonstrated a decrease in leptin levels in patients treated with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) [58,61–65]. Night-time levels of ghrelin are increased in obese patients [66]. One study showed that 2 days of CPAP treatment were sufficient to significantly decrease ghrelin levels in patients with OSA [65].
In addition to causing sleep fragmentation and overall sleep loss, OSA also involves respiratory distress, hypoxia, and hypercapnia with the result of an increase in sympathetic nervous activity. Leptin secretion in OSA could be triggered by hypoxia [67,68], whereas ghrelin release could be related to sympathetic activation [69].
Appetite regulation in OSA and the effect of OSA treatment are still the subject of a recent investigation. Eun et al. [44] showed that surgical treatment of OSA leads to a decrease in leptin levels in the absence of weight change, independently of the severity of OSA. Ursavas et al. [45] measured significantly higher serum ghrelin levels in 55 patients with newly diagnosed OSA compared with nonapneic age-matched and BMI-matched participants, despite no difference in total sleeping time and sleep efficiency. Ghrelin levels correlated with the apnea-hypoxia index (AHI) and with subjective sleepiness. In this study, adipokines such as leptin, adiponectin, and resistin did not differ between the groups.
The published studies have not measured subjective ratings of hunger, food preferences, or food intake. One of the abnormalities of sleep architecture seen in OSA is reduced slow wave sleep (SWS) or ‘deep’ sleep. Preliminary data showed that experimental suppression of SWS without affecting sleep duration in young healthy adults leads to increased hunger for calorie dense foods with high carbohydrate content particularly in the afternoon and evening hours [70]. In parallel with these early findings in the adults, a very recent study in 5–9-year-old obese children with and without OSA demonstrate that children with OSA ate 2.2 times more fast food and less healthy food such as fruits and vegetables, and they were 4.2 times less likely to be involved in organized sports [71]. Furthermore, OSA severity positively correlated with plasma ghrelin levels [71].
