Hypohydration but not Menstrual Phase Influences Pain Perception in Healthy Women

INTRODUCTION
Pain is recognized as a public health problem (1). Chronic pain [i.e., pain that persists for ?3 mo (2)] in particular, affects ?20% of the global population (3, 4), with negative consequences to the individual, society, healthcare, and the economy. In the United States, the annual cost of chronic pain is estimated to be $635 million—more than that of heart disease, cancer, and diabetes combined (5). However, chronic pain treatment has proven difficult due to the complex and multifactorial nature of pain (6). In a survey conducted across several European countries, 40% of chronic pain sufferers reported feeling dissatisfied with the effectiveness of their pain treatment(s) (4). Hence, more research on the mechanisms and factors contributing to a person’s pain experience is needed. Given the various complexities of studying chronic pain (e.g., ethical, logistical, and medical considerations), such research is usually performed by administering various acute experimental pain stimuli to healthy individuals.

Recent studies have shown that hypohydration can increase experimental pain sensitivity (7, 8). Mild hypohydration of <1% body mass loss, induced by prior fasting and exercise, was found to decrease pain thresholds (i.e., increased pain sensitivity) during a cold pressor task in men, compared with when they were rehydrated (7). These findings were supported in a later study, where subjective ratings of cold pressor pain in men were higher after 24 h of fluid restriction (1.4% body mass loss) than in the euhydrated condition (8). Similarly, a field study showed that hypohydrated cyclists perceived more intense pain in their leg muscles during an ultra-endurance race, compared with the euhydrated cyclists (9). However, these studies were primarily performed in men and the effects of hypohydration on pain in women have not been formally investigated.

Several chronic pain conditions are more prevalent among women than men (10). Women also tend to display greater sensitivity to various experimental pain stimuli (11). Furthermore, pain perception in women may be influenced by hormonal fluctuations (primarily 17?-estradiol and progesterone) throughout the menstrual cycle (12, 13). It is generally agreed that the severity of pain symptoms in several chronic pain conditions varies across the menstrual cycle (13, 14); however, whether the menstrual phase affects experimental pain sensitivity in healthy, pain-free women is still contestable (15, 16). The lack of accurate verification of menstrual phases and presence of various potential confounders (e.g., dysmenorrhea, dietary, and lifestyle factors) in many studies could explain the inconsistent findings (15). Some studies have attempted to address these issues (e.g., see Refs. 17 and 18), but such studies are scant and did not appear to impose a progesterone threshold to ensure only ovulatory cycles were included (19). Notably, none of the previous studies measured hydration status of participants at the time of testing, which may be influenced by menstrual phase (20, 21).

The ovarian hormones affect body fluid regulatory mechanisms (22), with potential implications for hydration status (20, 21). The mid-luteal phase (high 17?-estradiol and progesterone) is associated with an earlier release of arginine vasopressin (AVP)—a fluid-regulatory hormone that increases renal water retention—and thirst during exercise-induced dehydration or hypertonic saline infusion, compared with the early follicular phase (low 17?-estradiol and progesterone) (23, 24). This may potentially reduce the severity of dehydration for a given hydration challenge in the mid-luteal phase (20, 21). In the context of pain, this may suggest: 1) differences in the hyperalgesic effect of hypohydration in the early follicular compared with mid-luteal phase, 2) potential variability in hydration status across the menstrual cycle may have confounded previous research on effects of the menstrual phase and experimental pain sensitivity, and 3) hypohydration may reduce the efficacy of pain treatments in women (21).

Importantly, mild hypohydration appears to be common among women, with data from the United States showing approximately half of the 7,855 surveyed women meeting the hypohydration criterion (plasma tonicity > 295 mmol·L?1) (25). Therefore, the current study investigated the effects of hypohydration and menstrual phase on experimental pain sensitivity in women. We also examined whether the negative consequences of hypohydration on pain could be remedied by acute water ingestion. We hypothesized that 1) hypohydration would increase experimental pain sensitivity in women, 2) the magnitude of this increase in pain sensitivity would differ between the early follicular (EF) and mid-luteal (ML) phases, and 3) acute water ingestion would reverse the hyperalgesic effect of hypohydration.

METHODS
Ethical Approval
The study was approved by the Massey University Human Ethics Committee: Southern A (18/66). The study conformed to the requirements of the US Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects (45 CFR, Part 46), and the standards set by the latest revision of the Declaration of Helsinki, except for registration in a database. All participants provided written, informed consent before all trials. Researchers were not blinded to the experimental conditions and analyses.

Participants
Twenty-three healthy, eumenorrheic women initially volunteered for this study. As this is the first study, to our knowledge, that has investigated the effects of hypohydration and menstrual phase in combination, there was no reference study to base our sample size calculations on. As such, sample size was estimated from two previous studies; one on hypohydration and pain (? = 0.79 and effect size = 0.53) (8) and the other on a meta-analysis on menstrual phase effects on pain (effect size = 0.5 for ischemic pain, ? = 0.80) (12), which yielded required sample sizes of n = 17 and n = 27, respectively at an ? = 0.05. Therefore, we aimed for 17 > n < 27 and estimated the required number of participants for sufficient power to be n = 22.

Six participants did not proceed with the experimental trials due to scheduling difficulties; thus, 17 women completed all experimental trials [means (SD): age, 28 (8) yr; height, 1.63 (0.07) m; body mass, 65.0 (10.8) kg]. Participants reported having regular menstrual cycles (i.e., 21–35 days) at the time of recruitment and had not used hormonal contraceptives within the past 6 mo. All participants were nonsmokers, had no pre-existing or history of medical, psychiatric, pain-related, or menstrual-related disorders (e.g., dysmenorrhea, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and premenstrual syndrome), and were not taking any medications. Taking into consideration these inclusion/exclusion criteria, women aged > 18 < 50 yr were recruited. All participants, except for one, were recreationally physically active, engaging in at least 150 min of structured exercise per week.

Experimental Overview
Participants attended the laboratory on six occasions: two familiarization sessions, followed by four experimental trials. The four experimental trials were a full crossover of menstrual phase (EF and ML) and hydration status [euhydrated (EUH) and hypohydrated (HYPO)] and were performed over one or two menstrual cycles. The order of the experimental trials was randomized and counterbalanced, but the order of EUH and HYPO for each participant was maintained in the different menstrual phases. The experimental trials for each participant began at the same time of day (±1 h) to minimize diurnal variation in pain sensitivity (26) and ovarian hormone concentrations (27). All trials were separated by at least 48 h and were performed under standard environmental conditions (22°C, 50% relative humidity, room illuminance of 600 lx).

Familiarization
Before the experimental trials, participants were familiarized with the ischemic pain test (see Ischemic Pain Test) on two separate occasions to minimize potential learning and anxiety effects. The first familiarization session also included measurement of participants’ height and body mass (for calculation of fluid volume), and assessment of their maximal handgrip strength (see Maximal Handgrip Strength Assessment) to determine the absolute intensity for the submaximal contractions during the ischemic pain test. The number of familiarization sessions was determined from preliminary assessment of the time course of the learning effects, where pain outcome measures appeared to plateau after two sessions.

Maximal Handgrip Strength Assessment
Using their nondominant hand, participants performed three maximal voluntary contractions (MVC) with a handgrip dynamometer (MLT003 Grip Force Transducer, ADInstruments Inc., CO) (28). Participants were asked to squeeze the dynamometer maximally for 5 s during each MVC, separated by 1 min of rest. Force output from the dynamometer was recorded (PowerLab, ADInstruments, Dunedin, New Zealand) and displayed in real-time (LabChart Pro, ADInstruments, Dunedin, New Zealand). Maximal handgrip strength was determined by calculating the mean of the peak values for the three MVCs. This assessment was only conducted once during the first familiarization session, rather than at the start of each experimental trial, to prevent potential effects of the MVCs on subsequent pain sensitivity (28). Furthermore, maximal handgrip strength does not appear to be affected by menstrual phase (19, 29) or hypohydration (30, 31).

Dietary and Lifestyle Control
Participants refrained from pain-relieving medications, alcohol, and strenuous exercise at least 12 h before the start of each experimental trial. Participants also maintained their habitual caffeine intake over this 24-h period to minimize confounding effects of caffeine on pain sensitivity (32) and psychological variables (33, 34). To prevent caffeine withdrawal during the hypohydrated trials, participants who normally consumed caffeinated beverages were given a caffeine tablet (No-Doz Awakeners, Novartis Consumer Health, Inc.) to take in place of the beverages. Participants recorded their diet, physical activity, and time to bed and wake (i.e., sleep duration) during the 24-h period before their first trial and were asked to replicate these for subsequent trials. Participants completed a dietary and lifestyle record sheet at the start of each trial to assess adherence to these instructions.

Menstrual Cycle Phase and Hydration Intervention
Participants were tested during the EF and ML phases of their menstrual cycle to maximize the phase difference in ovarian hormone concentrations. The EF trials took place on days 4 (1) and 6 (2) and the ML trials on days 20 (2) and 22 (2), with day 1 representing start of menses and assuming a conventional 28-day menstrual cycle. Testing was scheduled using the three-step method (35) whereby self-reported menses onset and urinary luteinizing hormone (LH) testing (EasyCheck Ovulation Test, Phoenix Medcare, Ltd., Auckland, New Zealand) prospectively identified EF and ML, whereas measurement of serum 17?-estradiol and progesterone retrospectively confirmed ML. The EF phase was further verified by 17?-estradiol concentrations that were lower than in ML. Participants started daily LH testing 16 days before the end of a typical cycle until a positive LH test result was obtained (confirmed visually by the researchers), with ML trials then scheduled six to ten days after the positive LH test. To ensure ovulation had occurred and to minimize the likelihood of including anovulatory or luteal phase-deficient cycles, participants with progesterone < 5 ng·mL?1 were excluded from the final analyses (19, 36).

Twenty-four hours before each trial, participants were instructed to either restrict fluid intake and avoid consumption of high-water content foods (>50%, e.g., soups, vegetables, and fruits) (HYPO), or to drink ad libitum (EUH). Participants recorded their food and fluid intake over this 24-h period retrospectively at the start of each trial (see Dietary and Lifestyle Control and Experimental Protocol).

Experimental Protocol
Upon the participants’ arrival at the laboratory, a blood sample was obtained from the antecubital vein of the dominant arm via venepuncture. Participants then provided a urine sample and had their body mass measured. Urine specific gravity (USG) was measured immediately to confirm euhydration (USG < 1.020) or hypohydration (USG ? 1.020) (37). Participants then completed the dietary and lifestyle record sheet, Centre for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) (EUH only; see Measurements) and thirst ratings, followed by the ischemic pain test.

Immediately after the pain test, participants ingested a glass of water (5 mL·kg?1 of body mass measured during the first familiarization) and finished it within 5 min. This volume of water was previously shown to produce an immediate decrease in thirst perception in hypohydrated men (38). A 30-min break followed, during which participants remained in the laboratory and performed their activity of choice (e.g., reading and watching videos) that was consistent for all trials. After the break, participants repeated the thirst ratings and ischemic pain test. The duration of the break was determined based on previous data that examined the reliability of pressure pain measurements taken before and after 30 min of rest (39). Pain thresholds at both time points were not different; however, pain ratings decreased after the 30-min break in women, but not in men. Although this suggests that more than 30 min may be required to ameliorate carryover effects, especially in women, we decided on 30 min to prevent boredom and restlessness since participants had to remain in the laboratory during this period.

Ischemic Pain Test
The ischemic pain test consisted of the Submaximal Effort Tourniquet Procedure (40). This experimental pain stimulus was chosen as it is more clinically relevant than other pain stimuli (e.g., noxious heat, mechanical pressure, and electrical stimulation) (41). A pneumatic cuff was positioned on the participant’s nondominant arm, just above the elbow joint. The participant’s arm was passively raised to a vertical position for 30 s to promote venous drainage. The pneumatic cuff was then inflated to 250 mmHg and a stopwatch was started. The participant’s arm was immediately lowered to a horizontal position on the table, such that the forearm rests on the table with the elbow joint at a 90° angle. To promote forearm ischemia, participants performed 25 handgrip exercises at 30% of their predetermined maximum handgrip strength (see Familiarization). Each contraction was sustained for 2 s and followed by 2 s of rest. Auditory signals indicated the start and end of each contraction. Participants received continuous visual feedback of their force output and the target force on a laptop screen.

Upon completion of the handgrip exercises, the cuff remained inflated on the participant’s arm and participants watched a nature documentary to standardize their attention throughout the remainder of the pain test. The volume of the video was maintained at 30% for all trials. One minute after the end of the handgrip exercises, participants rated their pain intensity and unpleasantness on a 10-cm visual analog scale (VAS) (42). Participants were asked to indicate verbally when they were no longer able or willing to endure the pain (pain tolerance). The stopwatch was then stopped; just before the cuff was deflated, participants rated their pain intensity and unpleasantness again, to verify that they had reached pain tolerance. Unknown to participants, a maximum time limit of 20 min was enforced for the pain test.

Measurements
Anthropometric.
Participants’ height and body mass were measured using a stadiometer (Seca, Hamburg, Germany; accurate to 0.1 cm) and electronic scale (Model X3M, HIWEIGH Technologies Limited, Shanghai, China; accurate to 10 g), respectively.

Ovarian hormone concentrations.
Venous blood was collected into two 10 mL vacutainer tubes (Becton-Dickson, Oxford, UK). One tube contained clot activator for analysis of serum osmolality (Sosm), 17?-estradiol, and progesterone concentrations, whereas the other tube contained K3EDTA for analysis of plasma copeptin. The tube containing clot activator was inverted gently and left to clot for a minimum of 30 min at room temperature. The whole blood in both tubes was then centrifuged (Centrifuge 5804 R, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) at 4°C and 260 g for 15 min to separate serum and plasma from whole blood. Aliquots of serum and plasma were then separated into three Eppendorf tubes (Genuine Axygen Quality) each and stored at ?80°C for further analysis. Commercially available enzyme-linked immune assays were used to measure concentrations of 17?-estradiol (Demeditec Diagnostics, Kiel, Germany) and progesterone (IBL International, Hamburg, Germany) in serum samples, with a sensitivity of 6.2 pg·mL?1 and 0.045 ng·mL?1, respectively, and an intra-assay variation of <6% and <7%, respectively. The ratio of progesterone to 17?-estradiol (P4:E2 ratio) was then calculated (43).

Hydration status.
Hydration status was assessed by measurement of Sosm, plasma copeptin concentrations, USG, ratings of thirst perception, and percent body mass change. Serum osmolality was measured via freezing-point depression (Digimatic osmometer Model 3D2, Advanced Instruments, Inc., Norwood, MA). Measurements were made in duplicate and averaged. If the two measurements differed by more than 5%, a third measurement was taken and the average of the two closest values was calculated. Plasma copeptin concentrations, a surrogate marker for AVP (44, 45), were measured with an automated immunofluorescent Copeptin proAVP KRYPTOR assay (B·R·A·H·M·S KRYPTOR compact PLUS analyzer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Henningsdorf, Germany), with a sensitivity of 1.08 pmol·L?1. Urine specific gravity was measured using a handheld clinical refractometer (Clinical Refractometer MASTER-SUR/NM, Atago Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Thirst perception was measured using pen and paper with a 10-cm VAS (46). Percent body mass change in HYPO was calculated from the EUH body mass within the same menstrual phase.

Psychological variables.
Depressive symptomatology was assessed using the CES-D (47). Given the 1-wk response timeframe of the CES-D, it was only administered once in each menstrual phase during the EUH trial.

Statistical Analyses
All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS software for Windows (IBM SPSS Statistics 20, NY). Descriptive values are reported as means (SD), unless otherwise stated. Data were assessed to ensure they were normally distributed and for sphericity, with no corrections needed. Data for Sosm, plasma copeptin, USG, body mass, 17?-estradiol, progesterone, and the P4:E2 ratio were assessed using a two-way (Phase × Hydration) repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). For thirst ratings, pain tolerance and pain intensity, and unpleasantness ratings, the data were analyzed by three-way (Phase × Hydration × Water) repeated-measures ANOVA. When main or interaction effects occurred for the two- or three-way ANOVA, post hoc pair-wise analyses were conducted using paired-samples t tests with Bonferroni correction, where appropriate. Data for CES-D and percent body mass change were analyzed using a paired-samples t test to compare means between menstrual phases. Bivariate Pearson’s correlations were performed to examine the direction and strength of relationships between the main independent (i.e., hydration markers and ovarian hormone concentrations) and dependent (i.e., ischemic pain measures) variables measured at baseline (i.e., before water ingestion). All pairwise data were included in the correlation analyses to maximize statistical power. Effect sizes are reported as partial eta-squared (?2p
) with demarcations of small (<0.06), medium (>0.06 and <0.14), and large (>0.14) effects, respectively (48). An a priori alpha of ? = 0.05 was used to demarcate statistically significant effects.

RESULTS
Following analysis of ovarian hormone concentrations, three participants did not meet the progesterone threshold of >5 ng·mL?1 and were excluded from subsequent analyses. Therefore, the following results are reported for the remaining 14 participants.

Self-Reported Sleep Duration and Depressive Symptomatology
Mean sleep duration across trials was 7.4 (1.6) h, which was not different between hydration conditions or menstrual phases (all P ? 0.15, ?2p
 ? 0.15). Incomplete data were collected for CES-D scores (n = 13). CES-D scores were not different between menstrual phases [EF: 10 (7) vs. ML: 12 (6); P = 0.55, ?2p
?=?0.03].

Ovarian Hormone Concentrations
Because of the difficulty in obtaining blood samples in one or more trials for three participants, incomplete data were obtained for serum 17?-estradiol and progesterone concentrations (n = 11 each). Both progesterone [by 25.8 (25.9) vs. 0.5 (0.2) ng·mL?1; P = 0.009, ?2p
?=?0.51] and 17?-estradiol [by 106 (58) vs. 52 (27) pg·mL?1; P = 0.001, ?2p
?=?0.66] concentrations were higher in the ML compared with EF phase but were not dependent on hydration status (Phase × Hydration: all P ? 0.46; ?2p
 ? 0.06) (Table 1). Accordingly, the P4:E2 ratio was also higher in the ML compared with EF phase (P = 0.005, ?2p
?=?0.57) independent of hydration status (Phase × Hydration: P = 0.78; ?2p
?=?0.01). Progesterone, 17?-estradiol, and the P4:E2 ratio were all unaffected by hydration status (all P ? 0.46, ?2p
 ? 0.06).

Hydration Status
Biochemical markers of hydration status obtained at baseline (i.e., before water ingestion) indicate that 24 h of fluid restriction was successful in eliciting mild dehydration (Table 2). Absolute body mass was lower in HYPO than in EUH (P = 0.006, ?2p
?=?0.45) but this was not dependent on menstrual phase (Phase × hydration: P = 0.31, ?2p
?=?0.08). Therefore, average percent change in body mass from EUH to HYPO was 0.9% (1.3).

Because of the difficulty in obtaining blood samples, incomplete data were collected for Sosm (n = 10) and plasma copeptin (n = 9). Sosm was higher during HYPO than EUH (P = 0.001, ?2p
?=?0.72) and was higher in EF than in ML (P = 0.03, ?2p
?=?0.43), but these effects were not dependent on menstrual phase or hydration status, respectively (Phase × Hydration: P = 0.22, ?2p
?=?0.17). Both plasma copeptin (P = 0.04, ?2p
?=?0.44) and USG (P < 0.001, ?2p
?=?0.84) were also higher in HYPO than in EUH, but these were not dependent on menstrual phase (Phase × hydration: both P ? 0.40, ?2p
 ? 0.09). In accordance with the significantly higher values of these biochemical markers, baseline thirst ratings were also higher during HYPO than in EUH (P < 0.001; ?2p
?=?0.89), independent of menstrual phase (Phase × Hydration: P = 0.67, ?2p
?=?0.02).

Thirst Perception Ratings
Incomplete data were collected for thirst perception ratings (n = 13). Overall, thirst was higher during HYPO than EUH [by 3.2 (1.2) cm; P < 0.001, ?2p
?=?0.89] and was higher in ML than in EF [by 0.4 (0.6) cm; P = 0.04, ?2p
?=?0.30], but these effects were not dependent on menstrual phase or hydration status, respectively (Phase × hydration: P = 0.67, ?2p
?=?0.02). Thirst ratings decreased after water ingestion (from baseline) by a larger extent during HYPO than in EUH [? 4.0 (2.3) vs. ? 0.6 (1.4) cm; Hydration × Water: P < 0.001, ?2p
?=?0.65], independent of menstrual phase (Phase × Hydration × Water: P = 0.47, ?
2
p
?=?0.05).
Ischemic Pain Tolerance
One participant was able to tolerate the ischemic pain for the maximum time limit of 20 min (1,200 s) in one trial (EUH trial in the ML phase) (Fig. 1). Her pain tolerance in this trial was therefore recorded as 1,200 s. Pain tolerance was lower during HYPO than in EUH [by 34 (46) s; P = 0.02, ?2p
?=?0.37), independent of menstrual phase (Phase × Hydration: P = 0.15, ?2p
?=?0.15) or acute water ingestion (Hydration × Water: P = 0.92; ?2p
?=?0.001). Pain tolerance was unaffected by menstrual phase or acute water ingestion (both P ? 0.43, ?2p
 ? 0.05).

Ischemic Pain Intensity and Unpleasantness Ratings
Incomplete data were collected for pain intensity (Fig. 2) and unpleasantness (Fig. 3) at 1 min after handgrip exercise (n = 12 each) because two participants had terminated the pain test before this time point. Both pain intensity [6.6 (1.3) vs. 5.9 (1.4) cm; P = 0.004, ?2p
?=?0.55)] and pain unpleasantness [7.1 (1.3) vs. 6.4 (1.5) cm; P = 0.02, ?2p
?=?0.40] ratings at 1 min after handgrip exercise were higher during HYPO than in EUH, independent of menstrual phase (Phase × Hydration: both P ? 0.15, ?2p
 ? 0.18). Both pain intensity (P = 0.004, ?2p
?=?0.54) and pain unpleasantness (P = 0.04, ?2p
?=?0.34) ratings increased after water ingestion (from baseline), independently of hydration status (Hydration × Water: both P ? 0.50, ?2p
 ? 0.04) or menstrual phase (Phase × Water: both P ? 0.53, ?2p
 ? 0.04).

At pain tolerance, however, both pain intensity and pain unpleasantness ratings were not different between hydration conditions or menstrual phases (all P ? 0.13, ?2p
 ? 0.17). After water ingestion, pain intensity ratings increased by 3.4 (0.6) cm from baseline (P = 0.04, ?2p
?=?0.29) but pain unpleasantness was unaffected [+0.2 (4.6) cm; P = 0.10, ?2p
?=?0.20], independent of hydration status (Hydration × Water: both P ? 0.11, ?2p
 ? 0.19) or menstrual phase (Phase × Water: both P ? 0.55, ?2p
 ? 0.03).

Correlations
Serum concentrations of 17?-estradiol were negatively correlated with pain tolerance (r = ?0.31, P = 0.02) and positively correlated with pain unpleasantness ratings (r = 0.34, P = 0.02), but were not significantly associated with pain intensity ratings at 1 min after handgrip exercise (r = 0.23, P = 0.13). However, it should be noted that the strength of the significant correlations observed was weak (48) and therefore should be interpreted with caution. Neither progesterone nor the P4:E2 ratio was significantly associated with any of the ischemic pain measures (all r ? ?0.20, P ? 0.17). Similarly, no significant correlations were found between any of the hydration variables and ischemic pain measures (all r ? 0.20 and P ? 0.17).

DISCUSSION
This study examined the independent and combined effects of hypohydration and menstrual phase on experimental pain sensitivity in healthy eumenorrheic women, and the potential efficacy of acute water ingestion as a remedy to the deleterious impact of hypohydration. The main findings were that: 1) mild hypohydration increased pain sensitivity, 2) menstrual phase did not affect pain sensitivity, nor did it influence the effect of hypohydration on pain, and 3) acute water ingestion did not reduce pain sensitivity.

Hypohydration and Pain in Women
Independent of menstrual phase, mild hypohydration following 24 h of fluid restriction reduced pain tolerance (?8%) and increased pain intensity (+13%) and pain unpleasantness (+12%) ratings at 1 min after handgrip exercise (hereafter referred to as pain ratings) during ischemic pain stimulation, when compared with euhydration. These findings are consistent with those of previous studies that showed negative effects of mild hypohydration on experimental pain sensitivity in men (7, 8). Ogino et al. (7) observed a decrease in pain thresholds (i.e., increased pain sensitivity) following a combination of exercise-induced dehydration and fluid restriction, whereas Bear et al. (8) found an increase in pain intensity ratings but no difference in pain thresholds after 24 h of fluid restriction. Therefore, the current findings extend these previous results to women by showing that mild hypohydration also increases experimental pain sensitivity in women. The previous studies also did not include pain measures that reflect the affective/emotional experience of pain (i.e., pain tolerance or pain unpleasantness ratings) that may be important for chronic pain, whereas both pain threshold and pain intensity ratings assess the sensory/discriminative aspect of pain (49, 50). Although Bear et al. (8) measured pain tolerance, the nature of the stimulus-response relationship for the cold pressor task—i.e., plateau and gradual decline in the perceived intensity of the pain stimulus (41)—resulted in a large proportion (?2/3) of participants who were able to tolerate the pain until the 4-min cut-off time, thereby precluding meaningful analyses of the results. This issue was not apparent with the ischemic pain test used in the present study, as there was only one instance where the 20-min time limit was reached. Therefore, the current findings further add to the previous data by showing that mild hypohydration also negatively impacts the affective/emotional aspect of pain, as evidenced by the decrease in pain tolerance and increase in pain unpleasantness ratings compared with EUH.

The exact mechanisms underlying the hyperalgesic effect of hypohydration cannot be determined from the current data. However, one potential mechanism through which hypohydration may increase pain sensitivity is thirst perception. Geuter et al. (51) showed that an increase in thirst perception—induced by consumption of salty snacks followed by 5 h of fluid deprivation—led to an increase in pain intensity ratings during noxious heat stimulation, whereas subsequent ad libitum fluid intake, which reduced thirst perception, decreased pain ratings. In another study, stimulation of thirst sensation via hypertonic saline infusion increased pain intensity ratings during noxious pressure stimulation, which were associated with stronger activation of pain-related brain regions; namely, the anterior cingulate cortex and insula (52). Similar findings were reported in the study by Ogino et al. (7). These brain regions were previously shown to be activated and deactivated independently by an increase and decrease in thirst perception, respectively (52–54). However, it is not apparent from these data whether the increased pain sensitivity and pain-related brain activity were due to thirst perception per se, physiological hypohydration, or both.

Menstrual Phase and Experimental Pain Sensitivity
Menstrual phase did not modulate the hyperalgesic effect of hypohydration, nor did it independently affect pain sensitivity. The lack of a menstrual phase effect on ischemic pain sensitivity is consistent with the findings of most previous studies that examined ischemic pain responses across the menstrual cycle (18, 55–58). In contrast, studies by Fillingim et al. (59) and Pfleeger et al. (60) observed greater pain sensitivity during the luteal compared with follicular phase. However, concentrations of 17?-estradiol and progesterone were not measured in the study by Pfleeger et al. (60), whereas the specific definition of the luteal phase used by Fillingim et al. (59) differed from that in the current study. We examined the ML phase when concentrations of both 17?-estradiol and progesterone are elevated, whereas Fillingim et al. (59) included the late-luteal period in their classification of the luteal phase, during which concentrations of 17?-estradiol and progesterone are declining rapidly and are less stable compared with the ML phase. Given that menstrual phases characterized by fluctuating or unstable 17?-estradiol levels have been associated with increased severity of various chronic pain conditions (14), this may explain why Fillingim et al. (59) observed phase differences in pain sensitivity whereas we did not.

The equivocal and inconclusive results regarding menstrual phase effects on experimental pain sensitivity are thought to be due, in part, to the lack of proper verification of menstrual phases through blood measurements of 17?-estradiol and progesterone (15, 16), making it difficult to draw conclusions about the relationship between menstrual phase/hormone status and pain sensitivity. Similar to previous observations (22, 23), Sosm was lower in the ML than EF phase (Table 2); however, this phase difference in hydration did not appear to impact any of the ischemic pain measures (Figs. 1–3). In this study, we showed that after hydration status was controlled, menstrual phases were properly verified and potential confounders (e.g., dietary and lifestyle factors and dysmenorrhea) were minimized, there was no difference in ischemic pain sensitivity between the EF and ML phases. As such, our data suggest that the hormonal fluctuations within the menstrual cycle do not greatly impact pain sensitivity.

Interestingly, although we did not find differences in pain sensitivity between the EF and ML phase, there was a positive correlation between 17?-estradiol and pain sensitivity, suggesting that women with higher baseline levels of 17?-estradiol may be more sensitive to pain than those with lower 17?-estradiol levels (i.e., between-subject effect). However, given the weak strength of the correlation (r = ?0.32) (48), this finding should be interpreted with caution.

Effects of Acute Water Ingestion
Given that thirst perception may be a potential mechanism linking hypohydration and increased pain sensitivity, we hypothesized that acute water ingestion when hypohydrated would reduce pain sensitivity. This would also help to delineate the effects of thirst and hypohydration per se, on pain, since acute water ingestion would be expected to reduce thirst without altering hydration status (38, 61). However, contrary to our hypothesis, ischemic pain tolerance was not affected by ingestion of 5 mL·kg?1 of water, despite the significant decrease in thirst perception ratings. Meanwhile, ratings of both pain intensity and pain unpleasantness increased, which may appear counterintuitive as participants reported feeling more pain despite being less thirsty. These unexpected findings may be explained by carryover (sensitization) effects from the baseline pain test. A previous study showed that repeated pain stimulation within a single session produced a sensitization effect, whereby pain ratings increased gradually with each repeated stimulation (62). Therefore, this sensitization effect may have masked potential positive effects of acute water ingestion on pain. Future studies that either utilize a longer interval between the repeated pain tests, or perform the postwater ingestion pain test on a separate day, are required to gain further understanding on the relative importance of thirst perception and physiological hypohydration on pain.

Considerations
There are several considerations and limitations of this study that should be noted in addition to those already discussed earlier. First, only healthy, eumenorrheic women were included in this study, which ignores postmenopausal women and oral contraceptive pill users, who have different hormonal profiles compared with eumenorrheic women. Therefore, it is possible that hypohydration may affect pain sensitivity differently in these women compared with eumenorrheic women. Second, blood samples were not obtained after water ingestion to confirm that hydration status was not altered. However, previous data indicate that consuming a moderate volume of water, similar to that in the current study, does not acutely alter hydration status in hypohydrated men (38, 61). In addition, the relatively short interval of 30 min between water ingestion and the subsequent pain test was likely insufficient for hydration status to be altered, because a previous study showed that at least 75 min is required for 300 mL of water to be completely absorbed into the bloodstream (63). Third, as participants could not be blinded to the hydration intervention, the increased pain sensitivity observed during HYPO may have been confounded by nocebo effects (64, 65). Although participants were not aware of the study hypotheses, they were aware of the aims of the study, one of which was to investigate the effects of hypohydration on pain sensitivity. Given the negative connotations of hypohydration or dehydration, it is conceivable that participants would expect hypohydration to increase pain sensitivity, which may have subsequently influenced participants’ actual responses to the ischemic pain test. Fourth, the body mass change values in HYPO may not accurately reflect the fluid losses induced by the 24 h of fluid restriction. Due to the scheduling constraints that included two experimental visits within 3 days per menstrual phase, we were unable to obtain a baseline body mass at the start of the hydration intervention; thus, body mass change in HYPO was calculated using EUH body mass. As the EUH and HYPO trials within each menstrual phase were separated by at least 48 h, it is likely that the values were confounded by factors other than the change in body water content (e.g., urine and fecal losses, food and fluid consumption). Acknowledging this limitation, we obtained other measures of hydration status (i.e., Sosm, USG, copeptin, and thirst ratings) in addition to body mass change for a more accurate assessment of hydrations status. Finally, our sample size may have limited our ability to detect statistically significant menstrual phase effects on pain. As such, the effects of menstrual phase on pain require further investigation. Our study could provide a reference for future studies with a similar design to base their sample size calculations on. Nevertheless, large effect sizes (?2p
 = 0.37–0.55) were obtained for the main effect of hypohydration on pain, with an observed power of 0.7–0.9, which suggests a low probability of false negatives.

Perspectives and Significance
Our data indicate that hypohydration increases pain sensitivity in women and this effect may not be reversed immediately by water ingestion. Whereas, menstrual phase (EF vs. ML) does not appear to affect pain sensitivity. These findings suggest that insufficient water intake throughout the day may exacerbate pain perception in healthy women. Given the high prevalence of hypohydration among the general population (25), future studies should investigate whether hypohydration may worsen chronic pain conditions, and the potential efficacy of maintaining adequate hydration in alleviating pain symptoms. This may be especially important for older adults, who are more likely to be hypohydrated and experience chronic pain (25, 66). For human pain researchers, controlling or measuring hydration status of participants may be important to minimize confound, as clinically and physiologically relevant tests such as the cold pressor are affected (67). Although we did not find differences in pain sensitivity between the EF and ML phases after controlling for hydration status, more high-quality research is required to accurately determine whether menstrual phase does or does not affect pain sensitivity. Therefore, until a consensus on the topic has been reached, our data do not discount the need for future pain researchers to verify menstrual phase.

