Impact of insufficient sleep on dysregulated blood glucose control under standardised meal conditions

DISCUSSION
Here, we describe for the first time how sleep duration, quality and midpoint associate with postprandial glucose metabolism in healthy individuals. While sleep is generally recognised as one of the pillars of good health, the data reported here suggest that one-size-fits-all sleep recommendations are suboptimal, particularly in the context of postprandial glycaemic control, a key component of diabetes prevention.

By analysing both between-person and within-person effects, this study provides unique and powerful insights into both population-level and person-level effects of sleep on metabolic health. Notably, our data suggest that sleep duration, efficiency and midpoint are important determinants of postprandial glycaemic control at a population level, while illustrating that to optimise sleep recommendations it is likely necessary to tailor these to the individual.

Diet, sleep and health are interrelated. Several studies have investigated the relationship between sleep duration and glucose metabolism in pregnant women and reported a positive association between reduced sleep duration and impaired glucose metabolism [4, 27]. However, we are not aware of any other studies to date that investigate the relationship between objectively assessed sleep characteristics and postprandial glucose metabolism in generally healthy adults. The findings from this intervention study, with repeated test meal challenges, combined with objective assessments of sleep and blood glucose from a large population, complement a relatively small body of knowledge around a topic that is likely to be of high relevance for diabetes prevention [26]. Importantly, many earlier studies were undertaken in sleep laboratories with small sample size [11]. While the controlled environment of such studies is necessary to understand specific aspects of sleep and metabolism, the real-world, community-dwelling setting of the current study provides novel insights into how habitual sleep affects metabolic health.

The main analyses in this study focused on interactions of sleep and meal type and selected the OGTT as the ‘breakfast’ against which all other breakfast meals were compared. This is primarily because the OGTT is the standard clinical test used to assess glucose tolerance. While this is not a realistic breakfast meal, there is a growing trend, particularly among younger people [28], to consume energy drinks as a pick-me-up the morning after a poor night’s sleep, with the sugar content of a 75 g OGTT equating to roughly two to three servings of standard energy drinks.

SPT
With SPT being a marker of sleep duration, the lack of a significant marginal effect in the model without interactions indicates that sleep duration is not a major determinant of glucose metabolism. While this finding does not support some prior studies that have demonstrated a potential link between decreased sleep duration and insulin resistance, it is consistent with findings from a randomised controlled trial of 42 normal-weight adult short sleepers [11]. This may be because the effect of sleep duration in glycaemic control may be non-linear, with sleep affecting glucose metabolism only once sleep duration dips below a specific bound [11]. Moreover, sleep duration for the vast majority of PREDICT1 participants fell within the recommended range, as indicated by the mean 6.87 h of sleep within the lowest quartile of the SPT distribution (Table 1). Accordingly, this study may have been underpowered to detect an association between sleep duration and postprandial glycaemic control.

We found a significant statistical interaction between SPT and meal type, with high-carbohydrate meals and high-fat meals resulting in significantly lower glucose iAUCs compared with the OGTT reference, which contained only sugar. Although this study did not include pregnant women, the interaction effect between carbohydrate-rich meals and SPT is consistent with the results reported in a prior study in which reduced sleep was associated with impaired carbohydrate metabolism in pregnant women [29]. Thus, we conclude that the SPT has a similar impact on postprandial carbohydrate metabolism in men and pregnant and non-pregnant women. Additionally, the significant interaction between SPT and high-fat meals is supported by the finding that sleep disruption in fat-fed mice negatively affected glucose metabolism, with metabolism improving after recovery sleep [30]. As for the within-person SPT model, our findings suggest that both a longer SPT in general, as well as having a longer SPT than one is used to, are associated with improved postprandial glycaemic control the following morning. The presence of a significant finding with the SPT?×?high-carbohydrate meal interaction term in the person-centred model suggests that getting more sleep than usual might be more important for postprandial glycaemic control than the absolute amount of sleep achieved. This insight offers a potential avenue for personalised (within-person) sleep interventions.

SE
Better SE, between-person as well as within-person, was significantly associated with lower glucose iAUC, meaning that better SE, which is a proxy of sleep quality, was associated with better glucose management following breakfast. However, the absence of SE?×?meal interactions suggests that SE may be beneficial for postprandial glucose response irrespective of meal composition. Although there is not much research on SE and glucose metabolism in healthy adults, our findings concur with a recent meta-analysis in which poor sleep quality was associated with poor glycaemic control in individuals with type 2 diabetes [12]. Moreover, since SE can be viewed as a proxy for sleep quality, and because we found a significant association between SE and glucose regulation, but not between SPT and glucose regulation, our findings suggest that sleep quality is more important than sleep duration with respect to glycaemic control. However, sleep apnoea is known to affect SE, and sleep apnoea was not measured in the PREDICT1 study.

Sleep midpoint
The presence of significant effects in both between-person and within-person sleep midpoint models adjusted for sleep duration suggests a novel finding that later sleep midpoint, such as that caused by going to bed later, is associated with impaired postprandial glucose response to breakfast the following morning. This concurs with the proposition that human metabolic health is determined to a considerable extent by chronobiology [31]. Alternatively, later sleep midpoint may reflect alteration of sleep stages caused by going to bed later. Thus, the significance of later sleep midpoint may also be indicative of the role of specific sleep stages, such as slow-wave sleep, on glucose metabolism, supporting the view that treating slow-wave sleep disorders may help improve glycaemic control [32].

The 2 h glucose iAUC response to an OGTT breakfast is roughly twice that following a high-fat breakfast, indicating that a high-fat breakfast might help to mitigate the detrimental effects of poor sleep on postprandial glycaemia. Although comparing areas may have its drawbacks, for those whose sleep is often compromised, these effects may be cumulative. Thus, over time, there may be a meaningful clinical impact on glycaemic health. Nevertheless, because of the short duration of the current study, we are not able to assess this hypothesis.

Much of the research linking poor sleep with altered glucose metabolism is based upon observational studies, meaning that the pathophysiological mechanisms behind the associations reported here are not well understood [33]. However, poor sleep quality (measured by sleep fragmentation in healthy volunteers) appears to alter glucose responses through shifting sympathovagal balance and morning cortisol levels, which could in turn lead to decreased insulin sensitivity, increased hepatic glucogenesis and decreased insulin secretion [33]. In addition to cortisol levels, growth hormone, the secretion of which is sleep-dependent and which is essential for metabolic regulation, could also be at play [34,35,36]. Moreover, the glucose intolerance observed elsewhere in sleep-deprived individuals may derive from dysregulation of sympathetic and parasympathetic control of pancreatic function [37].

Strengths and limitations
This study significantly extends our understanding of the interplay between sleep and metabolic health. First, the fairly limited literature on sleep and postprandial blood glucose regulation is dominated by small studies that focus on populations with comorbid conditions (e.g. diabetes and obstructive sleep apnoea). In the few larger published studies, sleep has typically been assessed through self-report, which may be prone to bias. Moreover, most studies are cross-sectional and based in highly controlled environments. By contrast, our study is set within a large prospective cohort of generally healthy individuals, in whom high-resolution objectively assessed time-series sleep and glucose data were obtained. These design features made it possible to look at both intra- and inter-individual variation during the analyses, have generalisable results and shed light on cause and effect. The risk of non-compliance due to a non-clinical setting was addressed by high levels of staff support and all data points were checked for compliance and validity. We also examined the effects of within-person sleep measures, thus broadening the scope of previous studies that up to now only included between-person differences. In addition, instead of relying on fasting blood assays, the study focused on postprandial glucose, which is more relevant to everyday life scenarios because most people find themselves most often in a postprandial state during waking hours [26].

Notwithstanding the strengths of the study, it is limited in that no screening was performed for sleep disorders (e.g. sleep apnoea and insomnia), meaning that we could not control for disorders that have been shown to be associated with impaired glucose tolerance [38, 39]. In addition, while actigraphy overcomes many limitations of self-report measures, it is not as accurate as polysomnography in estimating sleep duration and efficiency and does not offer insight into individual sleep stages. The distribution of meal types was imbalanced, with high-fat and high-carbohydrate standardised meals having the highest number of entries. Thus, it is possible that analyses focused on the non-high-carbohydrate and non-high-fat meals may have lacked statistical power. An additional limitation is that owing to the free-living nature of the trial, physical activity levels varied within and between individuals, which may have interacted with sleep and meal type to affect blood glucose concentrations, a hypothesis that our study was not powered to examine.

Future studies assessing the impact of sleep stages on postprandial blood glucose levels are likely to extend the findings of the current analysis, as would exploration of these effects in individuals who are sleep-deprived owing to shift work or endogenous sleep disorders such as sleep apnoea.

Conclusion
Overall, this study suggests that sleep duration, quality and midpoint are important modifiable lifestyle features for improving postprandial glucose metabolism in healthy adults. As a consequence, this study’s findings may inform lifestyle strategies to improve postprandial blood glucose levels, focusing on earlier bedtime routines and maximising high-quality uninterrupted sleep. A combination of both generalised and more personalised sleep guidelines is likely required to ensure optimal metabolic health per se and maximise the effectiveness of guidelines for diabetes prevention.
Page 1 of 1

