Sleep and Hypertension article Insomnia and Hypertension 

Activation of the hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the sympathetic nervous system as seen in insomnia may predispose to hypertension development. 19 Phillips and Mannino 20 examined the 8,757 participants in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study over 6 years to determine whether they reported insomnia at baseline. The combination of diffi culty falling asleep, staying asleep, and having nonrestorative sleep was not associated with an increased risk of hypertension; however, participants reporting diffi culty falling asleep or sleep continuity problems had a slightly increased risk of hypertension at follow-up (OR, 1.2; 95% CI, 1.03-1.3), even after controlling for confounders, so, the effects are somewhat inconsistent. If insomnia is associated with an increased risk of hypertension, it does not appear to be the case in older adults. In the Cardiovascular Health Study, a prospective cohort study of 1,419 older persons aged 73 years at baseline with a 6-year follow-up, insomnia complaints did not predict incident hypertension. 21 Lanfranchi et al 22 examined 13 subjects with normal BP but with chronic primary insomnia ( Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, criteria) and 13 sex- and age-matched good sleepers using 24-h beat-to-beat BP along with electroencephalography spectral analysis. The subjects with insomnia had higher nighttime systolic BP and a decrease in the day-to-night systolic BP dipping compared with the good sleepers (both P 5 .01). Daytime diastolic BP ( P 5 .02) and nighttime diastolic BP ( P 5 .01) were higher in the subjects with insomnia, whereas the day-to-night diastolic BP dipping did not differ between the groups. A borderline association (r 5 0.38; P 5 .08) was noted between nighttime systolic BP and electroencephalography activity in the b frequency. Another confounder when examining the association between insomnia and hypertension risk is that insomnia can lead to short sleep duration, and short sleep duration affects hypertension risk. Vgontzas et al 23 examined the joint effect of insomnia and objective short sleep duration on hypertension in a cross-sectional, population-based sample of 1,741 randomly selected adults from Pennsylvania. Insomnia was associated with a signifi cantly higher risk for hypertension and when confounding variables were adjusted for (OR, 2.41; 95% CI, 1.6-3.7; P , .05). A sleep duration of  5 h increased hypertension risk (OR, 1.56; 95% CI, 1.1-2.1; P , .05) compared with the group sleeping > 6 h. Using logistic regression analysis, they examined the joint effect of insomnia and objective sleep duration on hypertension. The presence of both insomnia and an objective sleep duration of  5 h increased hypertension risk (OR, 5.12; 95% CI, 2.2-11.8) compared with sleeping . 6 h. On the basis of these fi ndings, approximately 50% of persons with chronic insomnia run a signifi cant risk for hypertension. Additionally, controlling for the presence of depression did not diminish the association. These data need to be taken seriously because they are from the fi rst large population-based study examining polysomnographic variables linking insomnia with short sleep duration and hypertension. 19 Note that participants with insomnia who slept . 6 h did not show an increased risk for hypertension compared with control subjects.
