Comparisons in the Recovery Response From Resistance Exercise Between Young and Middle-Aged Men

Discussion
Results of this study indicated no differences in the recovery response between YA and MA for any of the performance measures, nor in subjective levels of muscle pain or soreness. Furthermore, no between-group differences were observed in the inflammatory or muscle damage response to the exercise protocol. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to examine differences in the recovery response from high-volume resistance exercise between recreationally trained young and middle-aged adults. Our results comparing BL performance measures seem to be in agreement with other investigations, demonstrating differences in strength measures between young (23–29 years) and older adults (60–65 years) (7,15,24), and between middle-aged (41–42 years) and older adults (70–72 years) (17,18). It does seem that the decline in strength may develop during middle age. However, recovery from exercise seems to be comparable in both younger and middle-aged adults as reflected by similar changes in performance and markers of muscle damage and inflammation. Although changes in strength may occur in middle age, recovery from exercise does seem to be maintained in recreationally trained individuals.
The differences observed at BL in isometric force and the rate of force development is consistent with other investigations comparing younger and older adults (16,19,36). Although differences in age between young and middle-aged adults do seem to affect BL levels of strength, it does not seem to affect recovery from exercise. This is supported by similar patterns of muscle damage and inflammation observed during the recovery period after the HVP. Elevations in Mb and CK concentrations are consistent with the expected physiological response from a bout of resistance exercise (9,34). These results also suggest that middle-aged recreationally active men who regularly engage in resistance training do not seem to be at increased risk for greater soreness or muscle damage in comparison with younger recreationally trained men.
Similar response patterns were also noted in the inflammatory response for both groups. No significant elevations from BL were observed in CRP. However, significant increases in IL-6 concentrations were observed for both groups. Although CRP is an acute phase protein whose function is to activate the innate immune response and enhance phagocytosis (10), it does not seem to change after an acute bout of resistance exercise (6). Previous research has reported no significant changes in CRP concentrations after resistance training protocols recruiting primarily both upper-body (31) and lower-body exercises (4) in younger men. Furthermore, previous investigations have also indicated that training experience can reduce the CRP response to an acute bout of exercise (22,35). Considering that participants in both YA and MA were recreationally trained, it is likely that this training experience may have attenuated the CRP response. Physiologically, it is consistent with the lower stress and damage that occurs with repetitive training (9,35). Interleukin-6 is an inflammatory cytokine that facilitates communication for the mobilization, proliferation, and differentiation of immune cells to the site of tissue damage (6) and has been shown to increase after exercise (11). Elevations in IL-6 are related to the intensity, duration, and mode of training (11,13,32), but the literature is inconclusive regarding the IL-6 response to resistance training. A recent study reported that a bout of high-volume resistance exercise (8 sets of 10 repetitions with 70% of maximal strength in the squat exercise) resulted in a significant elevation in IL-6 concentrations 30 min after exercise, but no changes were observed after a bout of high-intensity resistance exercise (8 sets of 3 repetitions with 90% of maximal strength in the squat exercise) in experienced, trained lifters (4). The IL-6 response observed during this investigation as a result of a bout of high-volume resistance exercise seems to be consistent with that recently reported by Bartolomei et al. (4). However, age did not seem to exacerbate nor attenuate the IL-6 response in recreationally trained participants.
No differences were noted in the inflammatory or muscle damage response between YA and MA. As discussed earlier, this is likely related to the recreational training background of the participants. However, there were several limitations to the study that need to be acknowledged. The exercise protocol was performed on an isokinetic dynamometer, which may not have as much practical application as most resistance training programs use dynamic constant resistance exercises. In addition, unilateral, single-joint exercise recruited a relatively smaller muscle mass than is commonly used in most training programs. The use of this modality of exercise, which has been demonstrated to be very effective in eliciting muscle damage (20,30), may not have been sufficient to elicit significant performance and inflammatory changes in these recreationally trained participants. Future research should examine modes of training specific to the typical training program of the participants.
Practical Applications
The results of this study indicate that changes in muscle performance seem to begin during middle age, even in recreationally trained individuals. However, participating in recreational resistance training may mitigate any alteration in the recovery response from exercise. These results should be examined in the context that recovery was investigated after a unilateral, single-joint isokinetic exercise protocol. Although this method has been previously used as an effective mode of exercise to elicit muscle damage, it is not specific to the type of exercises typically used by recreational lifters. Future studies may wish to compare these population groups using multijoint, dynamic constant resistance exercises common to the training programs of most recreational lifters, regardless of age.
