Food craving, cortisol and ghrelin responses in modeling highly palatable snack intake in the laboratory

DISCUSSION
This preliminary study is the first to directly compare the effects of both food cue and stress exposure on HP food craving and HP food intake in a 3-day human laboratory experiment conducted within a controlled hospital-based setting with healthy community adults. As both the ubiquitous HP food environment and stressors are known to increase HP food intake and obesity risk, a direct comparison of these contexts could identify similar and differential processes that may underlie food motivation and intake. As hypothesized, and similar to our previous work in addiction [18], we found that exposure to both personal food cues and to personal stressors relative to a neutral relaxing control cue resulted in increases in HP food craving and subsequent increased snacking of HP foods in a standardized Food Snack Test (FST), but with differential effects in lean and overweight BMI groups. Furthermore, we found that increased food craving in these contexts was highly associated with subsequent amounts of HP food snack intake. Finally, both ghrelin and cortisol were found to significantly impact food motivation but differentially across lean and overweight individuals. Together, these results support the need for further investigation of biobehavioral processes underlying HP food motivation and intake, especially in the context of weight-related physiological adaptations.
Exposure to food cue imagery led to significant increases in HP food craving prior to the presentation of the FST at the pre-snack timepoint in both lean and OW individuals. Moreover, food cue-related increases in food craving predicted significant increases in HP snack intake across both lean and OW individuals. These data are consistent with a significant literature indicating that rewarding stimuli and their related contexts increase motivation and wanting of rewarding stimuli via conditioning and/or incentive salience mechanisms [4, 20, 42]. Also, a number of basic science and human neuroimaging studies have shown that food cue stimulus exposure increases food craving and activate brain reward and motivation regions [4, 7-11, 18, 43, 44]. Current findings further indicate that such food cue-related increases in HP food craving promote HP snack intake with greater intake of HP foods in the food cue context relative to the neutral relaxing contexts across individuals. These data validate the real-world contexts of advertising of HP foods to promote greater sales and intake of HP foods.
In contrast, we found a differential impact of stress on HP food craving and intake by BMI group where stress significantly increased food craving relative to the neutral condition, but only in the overweight and not the lean group. Furthermore, stress-induced HP food craving predicted subsequent HP snack intake in the overweight but not the lean group, suggesting that food motivational processes may be relevant in identifying those who are vulnerable to stress-induced eating. Previous laboratory studies have shown mixed results with some showing stress increasing food intake [17, 24], but others reporting no consistent increases in intake [23, 45]. While the methodology has varied across these studies, current findings suggest the need for direct comparison of BMI groups and consideration of weight-related adaptations in assessing stress effects on HP food motivation and intake. Current findings are also supported by a growing literature suggesting that BMI-related alterations impact not only metabolic hormones but also stress and reward processes that may contribute to increased food motivation and intake [18, 20, 44]. Together our findings on food cue- and stress- related effects on HP food motivation and intake suggests differential effects by BMI, that may in turn, point to different mechanisms that may drive weight gain and obesity risk in individuals who are lean versus those who are overweight.
Our findings also show differential effects of food cue and stress exposure on total ghrelin responses and their contribution to HP food motivation and intake. Stress and food cue exposure increased ghrelin responses, but significantly for the OW and not the LN group. Furthermore, only in the OW group was stress-induced ghrelin increases significantly associated with both HP food craving and subsequent HP food intake. While ghrelin has well known homeostatic effects on feeding function [46, 47], recent focus has been on its role in both stress and mood regulation as well as in hedonically motivated feeding behavior, partially via its effects on mesolimbic reward circuits [37, 48]. Findings indicate that ghrelin can shift preferences to high palatable foods and increase the motivational aspects of food reward [48]. Ghrelin is also known to increase with stress and is involved in regulating anxiety and mood (36, 49-51). Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that ghrelin administration increases the neural response to food pictures in areas associated with hedonic eating (i.e., amygdala, hippocampus, orbitofrontal cortex, striatum, and ventral tegmental area) [52]. Additionally, there is growing evidence that feed-forward circuitry between stress and food reward maybe partly mediated by ghrelin [52, 53]. In the current study, as the effects were specific to the OW group, they suggest that weight-related adaptations in ghrelin modulated pathways could potentially shift food motivation towards hedonic regulation, especially under stress conditions.
Finally, our findings also showed differential effects of cortisol responses to stress and food cue exposure. Notably, there was a significant increase in cortisol in the food cue relative to the neutral condition that was due to significant increases in cortisol in the lean group and not so in the OW group. Furthermore, food cue-related increases in cortisol was associated with greater food cue-related HP craving, suggesting a role for cortisol in food motivation. While glucocorticoids are often associated with the stress response, they are also known to play an important role in energy intake and regulation. Cortisol increases have been noted with intake of specific macronutrients, including carbohydrates, fats and proteins in animals and humans [6, 54], with the source of cortisol increases to be via both adrenal and extra-adrenal production [54]. Furthermore, in our previous neuroimaging study, increases in cortisol during a mild hypoglycemic state was associated with greater activation of brain reward regions that promoted greater food craving [44]. Together, this previous research supports current findings of the association between greater cortisol responses to food cue exposure with food cue-induced HP food craving.
We did not see an overall significant increase in cortisol during stress exposure, but this was largely due to a lack of response in the OW group. Remarkably, the OW group showed blunted cortisol responses during stress and food cue relative to neutral conditions. This finding is consistent with growing evidence of blunted cortisol and autonomic responses to stress challenge in people who are OW or obese, along with altered autonomic and peripheral catecholamine responses to stress challenge in those weight groups [18, 21-25, 55]. HPA axis adaptations with low cortisol awakening responses have been reported in higher BMI groups, along with blunted responses to stress and reduced dopamine activity [20, 56]. Thus, the current findings of lack of cortisol increases in the OW group leads one to speculate that such HPA axis adaptations may contribute to higher HP food craving and intake in food cue and in stress contexts. However, this is speculation and would need further testing in future studies.
Several limitations of the current study need to be considered. First, the sample size was small and thus the findings are preliminary and need further validation. Also, due to the small sample size, sex differences and differential responses within the overweight groups were not assessed. It is possible that men and women differ in their food motivation and intake responses in food cue and stress contexts as shown in previous work [26,27]. Also, continuous assessment of BMI rather than arbitrary cutoffs for individuals in the lean, overweight and obese BMI range may provide greater sensitivity in assessing weight related adaptations. Thus, research with larger samples is required to replicate current findings and address these issues. Finally, as this study was conducted while participants were in a hospital, it is not clear whether the findings are generalizable to an outpatient experimental context or to real world food motivation and intake settings. On the other hand, as food cues and stress are among the most common contexts in which overeating of HP foods occur in the real world, the current study presents a well-controlled experimental model to study the biobehavioral processes that may contribute to increased food motivation and intake of highly palatable foods. Evidence of HP food motivation and increased snacking in these contexts is consistent with reports of obesogenic environments promoting increased HP food intake and weight gain in the real world. Furthermore, positive associations of HP food craving and intake by total ghrelin and cortisol responses suggests a role for metabolic and neuroendocrine adaptations in increased HP food motivation and intake.
?
HIGHLIGHTS:
* This paper directly compares the effects of both food cue and stress exposure on highly palatable food craving and intake in a 3-day human laboratory experiment conducted within a controlled hospital-based setting with healthy community adults.
* Results show that food cues and stress exposure increases food craving and subsequent snacking of highly palatable foods, and food cravings predict subsequent highly palatable food intake.
* Ghrelin and cortisol hormones appear to play a role in food cue and stress related food motivation and intake.
* These findings suggest the need for further carefully controlled studies to understand the biobehavioral processes that drive overeating and weight gain.

