Daily Energy Expenditure through the Human Life Course
[This appears to be the discussion]:
In addition to providing empirical measures and predictive equations for total expenditure from infancy to old age (Tables S1, S2), our analyses bring to light major changes in metabolic rate across the life course. To begin, we can infer fetal metabolic rates from maternal measures during pregnancy: if body size-adjusted expenditures were elevated in the fetus, then adjusted expenditures for pregnant mothers, particularly late in pregnancy when the fetus accounts for a substantial portion of a mother’s weight, would be likewise elevated. Instead, the stability of adjusted total and basal expenditures at ~100% during pregnancy (Figure 2B) indicates that the growing fetus maintains a fat free mass- and fat mass-adjusted metabolic rate similar to adults, which is consistent with adjusted expenditures of neonates (both ~100%; Figure 2) in the first weeks after birth. Total and basal expenditures, both absolute and size-adjusted values, then accelerate rapidly over the first year. This early period of metabolic acceleration corresponds to a critical period in early development in which growth often falters in nutritionally-stressed populations (19). Increasing energy demands could be a contributing factor.
After rapid acceleration in total and basal expenditure during the first year, adjusted expenditures progressively decline thereafter, reaching adult levels at ~20 yr. Elevated adjusted expenditures in this life stage may reflect the metabolic demands of growth and development. Adult expenditures, adjusted for body size and composition, are remarkably stable, even during pregnancy and post-partum. Declining metabolic rates in older adults could increase the risk of weight gain. However, neither fat mass nor percentage increased in this period (Figure S3), consistent with the hypothesis that energy intake is coupled to expenditure (20).
Following previous studies (21–25), we calculated the effect of organ size on basal expenditure over the lifespan (Methods). At rest, the tissue-specific metabolic rates (Watts/gram) of the heart, liver, brain, and kidneys are much greater than those of the muscles and other lean tissue or fat (21–25). Organs with a high tissue-specific metabolic rate, particularly the brain and liver, account for a greater proportion of fat free mass in young individuals, and thus organ-based basal expenditure, estimated from organ size and tissue-specific metabolic rate, follows a power-law relationship with fat free mass, roughly consistent with observed basal expenditures (Methods, Figure S6). Still, observed basal expenditure exceeded organ-based estimates by ~30% in early life (1 – 20 y) and was ~20% lower than organ-based estimates in subjects over 60 y (Figure S6), consistent with previous work indicating that tissue-specific metabolic rates are elevated in children and adolescents (22, 24) and reduced in older adults (21, 23, 25).
We investigated the contributions of daily physical activity and changes in tissue-specific metabolic rate to total and basal expenditure using a simple model with two components: activity and basal expenditure (Figure 3; Methods). Activity expenditure was modeled as a function of physical activity and body mass, assuming activity costs are proportional to weight, and could either remain constant at adult levels over the lifespan or follow the trajectory of daily physical activity measured via accelerometry, peaking at 5 – 10 y and declining thereafter (11, 26, 27) (Figure 3). Similarly, basal expenditure was modeled as a power function of fat free mass (consistent with organ-based BEE estimates; Methods) multiplied by a “tissue specific metabolism” term, which could either remain constant at adult levels across the lifespan or follow the trajectory observed in adjusted basal expenditure (Figure 2). For each scenario, total expenditure was modeled as the sum of activity and basal expenditure (Methods).
Models that hold physical activity or tissue-specific metabolic rates constant over the lifespan do not reproduce the observed patterns of age-related change in absolute or adjusted measures of total or basal expenditure (Figure 3). Only when age-related changes in physical activity and tissue-specific metabolism are included does model output match observed expenditures, indicating that variation in both physical activity and tissue-specific metabolism contribute to total expenditure and its components across the lifespan. Elevated tissue-specific metabolism in early life may be related to growth or development (22, 24). Conversely, reduced expenditures in later life may reflect a decline in organ level metabolism (23, 25, 28).
Metabolic models of life history commonly assume continuity in tissue-specific metabolism over the life course, with cellular metabolic rates increasing in a power-law manner (Energy = aMassb) and the energy available for growth during the juvenile period made available for reproduction in adults (29, 30). Measures of humans here challenge this view, with size adjusted metabolism elevated ~50% in childhood compared to adults (including pregnant females), and ~25% lower in the oldest subjects. It remains to be determined whether these fluctuations occur in other species. In addition to affecting energy balance, nutritional needs, and body weight, these metabolic changes present a potential target for clinical investigation into the kinetics of disease, pharmaceutical activity, and healing, processes intimately related to metabolic rate. Further, there is considerable metabolic variation among individuals, with TEE and its components varying more than ± 20% even when controlling for fat free mass, fat mass, sex, and age (Figure 1, ?,2,2, Table S2). Elucidating the processes underlying metabolic changes across the life course and variation among individuals may help reveal the roles of metabolic variation in health and disease.
