Hypohydration but not Menstrual Phase Influences Pain Perception in Healthy Women

DISCUSSION
This study examined the independent and combined effects of hypohydration and menstrual phase on experimental pain sensitivity in healthy eumenorrheic women, and the potential efficacy of acute water ingestion as a remedy to the deleterious impact of hypohydration. The main findings were that: 1) mild hypohydration increased pain sensitivity, 2) menstrual phase did not affect pain sensitivity, nor did it influence the effect of hypohydration on pain, and 3) acute water ingestion did not reduce pain sensitivity.

Hypohydration and Pain in Women
Independent of menstrual phase, mild hypohydration following 24 h of fluid restriction reduced pain tolerance (?8%) and increased pain intensity (+13%) and pain unpleasantness (+12%) ratings at 1 min after handgrip exercise (hereafter referred to as pain ratings) during ischemic pain stimulation, when compared with euhydration. These findings are consistent with those of previous studies that showed negative effects of mild hypohydration on experimental pain sensitivity in men (7, 8). Ogino et al. (7) observed a decrease in pain thresholds (i.e., increased pain sensitivity) following a combination of exercise-induced dehydration and fluid restriction, whereas Bear et al. (8) found an increase in pain intensity ratings but no difference in pain thresholds after 24 h of fluid restriction. Therefore, the current findings extend these previous results to women by showing that mild hypohydration also increases experimental pain sensitivity in women. The previous studies also did not include pain measures that reflect the affective/emotional experience of pain (i.e., pain tolerance or pain unpleasantness ratings) that may be important for chronic pain, whereas both pain threshold and pain intensity ratings assess the sensory/discriminative aspect of pain (49, 50). Although Bear et al. (8) measured pain tolerance, the nature of the stimulus-response relationship for the cold pressor task—i.e., plateau and gradual decline in the perceived intensity of the pain stimulus (41)—resulted in a large proportion (?2/3) of participants who were able to tolerate the pain until the 4-min cut-off time, thereby precluding meaningful analyses of the results. This issue was not apparent with the ischemic pain test used in the present study, as there was only one instance where the 20-min time limit was reached. Therefore, the current findings further add to the previous data by showing that mild hypohydration also negatively impacts the affective/emotional aspect of pain, as evidenced by the decrease in pain tolerance and increase in pain unpleasantness ratings compared with EUH.

The exact mechanisms underlying the hyperalgesic effect of hypohydration cannot be determined from the current data. However, one potential mechanism through which hypohydration may increase pain sensitivity is thirst perception. Geuter et al. (51) showed that an increase in thirst perception—induced by consumption of salty snacks followed by 5 h of fluid deprivation—led to an increase in pain intensity ratings during noxious heat stimulation, whereas subsequent ad libitum fluid intake, which reduced thirst perception, decreased pain ratings. In another study, stimulation of thirst sensation via hypertonic saline infusion increased pain intensity ratings during noxious pressure stimulation, which were associated with stronger activation of pain-related brain regions; namely, the anterior cingulate cortex and insula (52). Similar findings were reported in the study by Ogino et al. (7). These brain regions were previously shown to be activated and deactivated independently by an increase and decrease in thirst perception, respectively (52–54). However, it is not apparent from these data whether the increased pain sensitivity and pain-related brain activity were due to thirst perception per se, physiological hypohydration, or both.

Menstrual Phase and Experimental Pain Sensitivity
Menstrual phase did not modulate the hyperalgesic effect of hypohydration, nor did it independently affect pain sensitivity. The lack of a menstrual phase effect on ischemic pain sensitivity is consistent with the findings of most previous studies that examined ischemic pain responses across the menstrual cycle (18, 55–58). In contrast, studies by Fillingim et al. (59) and Pfleeger et al. (60) observed greater pain sensitivity during the luteal compared with follicular phase. However, concentrations of 17?-estradiol and progesterone were not measured in the study by Pfleeger et al. (60), whereas the specific definition of the luteal phase used by Fillingim et al. (59) differed from that in the current study. We examined the ML phase when concentrations of both 17?-estradiol and progesterone are elevated, whereas Fillingim et al. (59) included the late-luteal period in their classification of the luteal phase, during which concentrations of 17?-estradiol and progesterone are declining rapidly and are less stable compared with the ML phase. Given that menstrual phases characterized by fluctuating or unstable 17?-estradiol levels have been associated with increased severity of various chronic pain conditions (14), this may explain why Fillingim et al. (59) observed phase differences in pain sensitivity whereas we did not.

The equivocal and inconclusive results regarding menstrual phase effects on experimental pain sensitivity are thought to be due, in part, to the lack of proper verification of menstrual phases through blood measurements of 17?-estradiol and progesterone (15, 16), making it difficult to draw conclusions about the relationship between menstrual phase/hormone status and pain sensitivity. Similar to previous observations (22, 23), Sosm was lower in the ML than EF phase (Table 2); however, this phase difference in hydration did not appear to impact any of the ischemic pain measures (Figs. 1–3). In this study, we showed that after hydration status was controlled, menstrual phases were properly verified and potential confounders (e.g., dietary and lifestyle factors and dysmenorrhea) were minimized, there was no difference in ischemic pain sensitivity between the EF and ML phases. As such, our data suggest that the hormonal fluctuations within the menstrual cycle do not greatly impact pain sensitivity.

Interestingly, although we did not find differences in pain sensitivity between the EF and ML phase, there was a positive correlation between 17?-estradiol and pain sensitivity, suggesting that women with higher baseline levels of 17?-estradiol may be more sensitive to pain than those with lower 17?-estradiol levels (i.e., between-subject effect). However, given the weak strength of the correlation (r = ?0.32) (48), this finding should be interpreted with caution.

Effects of Acute Water Ingestion
Given that thirst perception may be a potential mechanism linking hypohydration and increased pain sensitivity, we hypothesized that acute water ingestion when hypohydrated would reduce pain sensitivity. This would also help to delineate the effects of thirst and hypohydration per se, on pain, since acute water ingestion would be expected to reduce thirst without altering hydration status (38, 61). However, contrary to our hypothesis, ischemic pain tolerance was not affected by ingestion of 5 mL·kg?1 of water, despite the significant decrease in thirst perception ratings. Meanwhile, ratings of both pain intensity and pain unpleasantness increased, which may appear counterintuitive as participants reported feeling more pain despite being less thirsty. These unexpected findings may be explained by carryover (sensitization) effects from the baseline pain test. A previous study showed that repeated pain stimulation within a single session produced a sensitization effect, whereby pain ratings increased gradually with each repeated stimulation (62). Therefore, this sensitization effect may have masked potential positive effects of acute water ingestion on pain. Future studies that either utilize a longer interval between the repeated pain tests, or perform the postwater ingestion pain test on a separate day, are required to gain further understanding on the relative importance of thirst perception and physiological hypohydration on pain.

Considerations
There are several considerations and limitations of this study that should be noted in addition to those already discussed earlier. First, only healthy, eumenorrheic women were included in this study, which ignores postmenopausal women and oral contraceptive pill users, who have different hormonal profiles compared with eumenorrheic women. Therefore, it is possible that hypohydration may affect pain sensitivity differently in these women compared with eumenorrheic women. Second, blood samples were not obtained after water ingestion to confirm that hydration status was not altered. However, previous data indicate that consuming a moderate volume of water, similar to that in the current study, does not acutely alter hydration status in hypohydrated men (38, 61). In addition, the relatively short interval of 30 min between water ingestion and the subsequent pain test was likely insufficient for hydration status to be altered, because a previous study showed that at least 75 min is required for 300 mL of water to be completely absorbed into the bloodstream (63). Third, as participants could not be blinded to the hydration intervention, the increased pain sensitivity observed during HYPO may have been confounded by nocebo effects (64, 65). Although participants were not aware of the study hypotheses, they were aware of the aims of the study, one of which was to investigate the effects of hypohydration on pain sensitivity. Given the negative connotations of hypohydration or dehydration, it is conceivable that participants would expect hypohydration to increase pain sensitivity, which may have subsequently influenced participants’ actual responses to the ischemic pain test. Fourth, the body mass change values in HYPO may not accurately reflect the fluid losses induced by the 24 h of fluid restriction. Due to the scheduling constraints that included two experimental visits within 3 days per menstrual phase, we were unable to obtain a baseline body mass at the start of the hydration intervention; thus, body mass change in HYPO was calculated using EUH body mass. As the EUH and HYPO trials within each menstrual phase were separated by at least 48 h, it is likely that the values were confounded by factors other than the change in body water content (e.g., urine and fecal losses, food and fluid consumption). Acknowledging this limitation, we obtained other measures of hydration status (i.e., Sosm, USG, copeptin, and thirst ratings) in addition to body mass change for a more accurate assessment of hydrations status. Finally, our sample size may have limited our ability to detect statistically significant menstrual phase effects on pain. As such, the effects of menstrual phase on pain require further investigation. Our study could provide a reference for future studies with a similar design to base their sample size calculations on. Nevertheless, large effect sizes (?2p
 = 0.37–0.55) were obtained for the main effect of hypohydration on pain, with an observed power of 0.7–0.9, which suggests a low probability of false negatives.

Perspectives and Significance
Our data indicate that hypohydration increases pain sensitivity in women and this effect may not be reversed immediately by water ingestion. Whereas, menstrual phase (EF vs. ML) does not appear to affect pain sensitivity. These findings suggest that insufficient water intake throughout the day may exacerbate pain perception in healthy women. Given the high prevalence of hypohydration among the general population (25), future studies should investigate whether hypohydration may worsen chronic pain conditions, and the potential efficacy of maintaining adequate hydration in alleviating pain symptoms. This may be especially important for older adults, who are more likely to be hypohydrated and experience chronic pain (25, 66). For human pain researchers, controlling or measuring hydration status of participants may be important to minimize confound, as clinically and physiologically relevant tests such as the cold pressor are affected (67). Although we did not find differences in pain sensitivity between the EF and ML phases after controlling for hydration status, more high-quality research is required to accurately determine whether menstrual phase does or does not affect pain sensitivity. Therefore, until a consensus on the topic has been reached, our data do not discount the need for future pain researchers to verify menstrual phase.

