Habitual tub bathing and risks of incident coronary heart disease and stroke

Discussion In the present long-term cohort study of middle-aged Japanese men and women, we observed an inverse association between tub bathing frequency and risks of CVD, CHD, total strokes and intracerebral haemorrhage. Tub bathing was not associated with a higher risk of sudden cardiac death. This is the first study to examine the long-term associations between tub bathing and CVD incidence using a large population-based cohort. Laukkanen’s study of 2315 men aged 42–60 years in Finland with 6-year follow-up investigated the association of sauna bathing frequency with risks of fatal CVD, fatal CHD and sudden cardiac death. In that study, the multivariable-adjusted HRs (95% CIs) for sauna bathing four to seven times/week compared with one time/week were 0.50 (95% CI 0.33 to 0.77) for fatal CVD, 0.52 (95% CI 0.31 to 0.88) for fatal CHD and 0.37 (95% CI 0.18 to 0.75) for sudden cardiac death.6 However, that study did not examine the effect of sauna on the risk of non-fatal CVD. A variety of studies have addressed the mechanisms by which heat exposure plays a role in preventing CVD.20 Heat exposure increases core body temperature, cardiac contractility, heart rate and blood flow, and decreases vessel endothelial shear stress.4 21 These effects are similar to the impact of exercise and are believed to improve vascular function over the long term.22 23 Preliminary research found that heat exposure induced expression of heat shock protein 90, and when it was bound to endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), eNOS, in turn, generated nitric oxide, resulting in vasorelaxation.24 There are, however, physiological differences between tub and sauna bathing; the former increases hydrostatic pressure, which in turn increases intracardiac pressure, while both tub and sauna bathing increase stroke volume, cardiac output, ejection fraction and reduce vascular resistance.25 The potential beneficial effect of tub bathing of CVD events may be mediated by the reduced development of major cardiovascular risk factors in those who took tub bath frequently. We found that the frequent tub bathing was significantly associated with a lower risk of hypertension, suggesting that a beneficial effect of tub bathing on risk of CVD may be in part due to a reduced risk of developing hypertension. The typical Japanese style of bathing involves filling the tub to shoulder depth with hot water at approximately 40°C–42°C,9 while some prefer temperatures upward of 43°C.26 In two previous controlled trials, one investigated the effects of hot bathing on blood pressure, flow-mediated vascular dilation, arterial compliance and aortic pulse waves among 20 young sedentary adults,4 and the other examined effects on body weight and abdominal circumference among 66 overweight adults.5 Both studies evidenced the favourable effects of tub bathing when using water up to 42°C. The negative aspect of tub bathing is that it can cause heatstroke more frequently when the tub water temperature is too high.27 In our research, we asked participants to subjectively describe their tub water temperature (lukewarm, warm or hot). However, we observed no significant difference in the inverse association between tub bathing frequency and risk of CVD by the water temperature. Our results did not suggest any preferable water temperature, but further research regarding the water temperature is warranted. We were able to conduct this observational study in a unique culture in which tub bathing is a common habit. The strength of our study included its prospective design, systemic registration of CHD and stroke incidence, use of a large sample from the general population, and a long follow-up duration. The large sample size and long-term follow-up allowed us to perform analysis after excluding participants with early cardiovascular events, and this reduced the possibility of reverse causation. Nonetheless, several limitations should be acknowledged. First, the information on the tub bathing frequency was obtained only at baseline. Therefore, participants may have changed their frequency during the follow-up period. Second, because those who frequently bathe in a tub were found likely to have higher education and to be office workers, tub bathing frequency may be a behavioural marker for higher socioeconomic conditions. However, the inverse association between tub bathing and risk of CVD outcomes remained statistically significant after adjusting for these socioeconomic variables. Third, we also did not inquire about reasons for bathing in a tub less frequently. For some, this may be due to illness or conditions by which risk of CVD could be elevated. However, the possibility for reverse causation is unlikely, although not totally negated, because the association between tub bathing frequency and risk of total CVD did not change materially after excluding participants who developed CVD or died within 5 or 10 years of baseline. Finally, though we adjusted for potential confounding variables based on previous research, we cannot negate the possibility of residual or unmeasured confounding. Conclusion We found that habitual tub bathing was associated with a lower risk of CVD among middle-aged Japanese, suggesting a beneficial effect on the prevention of CVD.

